https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/sites/default/files/2026-05/20260504BbnjPrepComReportFinal_AdvancedUnedited_0.pdf
→ https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/sites/default/files/2026-05/20260504BbnjPrepComReportFinal_AdvancedUnedited_0.pdf
Content-Type: application/pdf

04/05/26
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
A
Preparatory Commission for the Entry into Force of 
the Agreement under the United Nations Convention 
on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and 
Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of 
Areas beyond National Jurisdiction and the 
Convening of the First Meeting of the Conference of 
the Parties to the Agreement
Third session 
New York, 23 March – 2 April 2026
Report of the Preparatory Commission
I. Introduction
1. In its resolution 78/272 of 24 April 2024, the General Assembly decided to 
establish a Preparatory Commission to prepare for the entry into force of the 
Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the 
Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond 
National Jurisdiction (the Agreement) and the convening of the first meeting of the 
Conference of the Parties to the Agreement. The General Assembly also decided that
the Commission would meet at United Nations Headquarters, unless otherwise 
decided, and that the Commission would cease to exist at the conclusion of the first 
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement. 
2. In accordance with paragraph 13 of the resolution, support and secretariat 
services were provided to the Preparatory Commission by the Division for Ocean 
Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs (the Division), in 
cooperation with other relevant departments of the Secretariat.
II. Organizational matters
A. Sessions of the Preparatory Commission
3. Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 78/272, a three-day organizational 
meeting of the Preparatory Commission was held from 24 to 26 June 2024 to discuss 
organizational matters, including the election of the Co-Chairs and a Bureau of the 
Commission, the dates of the meetings of the Commission and the programme of work 
of the Commission. The first and second sessions of the Commission were convened
by the Secretary-General from 14 to 25 April and from 18 to 29 August 2025,
respectively, at United Nations Headquarters, in accordance with resolution 78/272 
and General Assembly decision 78/650. Pursuant to the same decision, and following 
consultations with the Co-Chairs, the Secretary-General convened the third session 
of the Commission from 23 March to 2 April 2026 at United Nations Headquarters in 
New York.
B. Election of officers
2/80
4. During the organizational meeting, the Preparatory Commission elected, at its 
first plenary meeting, Her Excellency Janine Coye-Felson, Permanent Representative
of Belize to the United Nations,1and, at its sixth plenary meeting, Adam McCarthy, 
Chief Counsel and First Assistant Secretary at the Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade of Australia, as Co-Chairs of the Commission.
5. At the same meeting, with regard to the Bureau, the Preparatory Commission 
decided, in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution 78/272, to proceed on the basis 
of the practice of the intergovernmental conference on an international legally binding 
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the 
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of ar eas beyond 
national jurisdiction, and to elect the members of the Bureau in a national capacity, 
on the understanding that, as far as possible, the Vice-Chairs should not change from 
one session to the next, in order to ensure stability in the Bureau, and being mindful 
of the need to take into account gender balance.
6. On that basis, the Commission elected a Bureau consisting of the following 
members: Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Germany, Japan, 
Latvia, Mauritius, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Sierra Leone, Singapore and South 
Africa. Following the resignation of Australia from the Bureau upon the election of 
Adam McCarthy (Australia) as Co-Chair on 26 June 2024, the Commission elected 
Canada to fill the seat left vacant on the Bureau.
7. Moreover, the Commission took note that, on an exceptional basis and without 
setting a precedent, the three seats on the Bureau for the Group of Asia-Pacific States 
would be rotated among nine States for the sessions of the Commission; that the 
following States would sequentially replace each other for the organizational, first 
substantive and second substantive sessions, respectively: Singapore, Tonga and Fiji; 
Japan, China and the Republic of Korea; and the Philippines, Indonesia and Viet Nam. 
Accordingly, on that understanding, Singapore, Japan and the Philippines served as 
members of the Bureau for the organizational meeting, Tonga, China and Indonesia 
served as members of the Bureau for the first substantive session and Fiji, the 
Republic of Korea and Viet Nam served as members of the Bureau for the second 
substantive session. It was further agreed that, for subsequent sessions, if any, the 
membership of the Bureau for the seats of the Group of Asia-Pacific States would be 
as communicated to the Co-Chairs by the States concerned. In advance of the third 
substantive session of the Commission, the Co-Chairs were informed that Japan, 
Singapore and the Philippines would serve as members of the Bureau for that session. 
C. Modalities of work
8. In paragraph 7 of resolution 78/272, the General Assembly decided that the rules 
and the established practice applicable to the procedure of the intergovernmental 
conference on an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine 
biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, as reflected in paragraphs 
17, 18 and 19 of resolution 72/249 of 24 December 2017, would apply mutatis 
mutandis to the procedure of the Commission unless otherwise agreed by the 
Commission.
__________________
1 Deputy Permanent Representative of Belize to the United Nations at the time of her election.
3/80
9. In the resolution, the General Assembly also decided that after 20 September 
2025 or the date of entry into force of the Agreement, 2 whichever came earlier, the 
taking of decisions by the Preparatory Commission should only be by States and 
regional economic integration organizations that had signed the Agreement or had 
ratified, approved, accepted or acceded to the Agreement. It further decided that the 
Commission would take decisions on any recommendations to the Conference of 
Parties to the Agreement at the final meeting of the Commission. 
10. At its organizational meeting, held from 24 to 26 June 2024, the Preparatory 
Commission decided that its substantive sessions should proceed in a manner that 
ensured transparency, inclusivity and meaningful participation, that its meetings 
would be provided with full conference services, including interpretation and 
documentation in all official languages, webcasting and press and meetings coverage, 
and that there should be no more than two parallel meetings, if any, at any given time 
during those sessions. In the light of the liquidity crisis facing the United Nations, 
which had a direct impact on the modalities of work of the Commission, and the 
resulting limited availability of certain conference services, including interpretation 
and webcasting, the Commission subsequently agreed that flexibility would be 
exercised in the implementation of these modalities.
11. The Preparatory Commission also decided, at its organizational meeting, that 
informal working groups or other working methods, including possible intersessional 
work, might be established by the Co-Chairs, in consultation with the Bureau, to 
progress the work of the Commission. At its first session, the Commission established
three informal working groups corresponding to the three clusters of issues discussed 
during its organizational meeting, with Informal Working Group I addressing issues 
falling under cluster I, entitled “Governance issues”; Informal Working Group II 
addressing issues falling under cluster II, entitled “Issues pertaining to the operation 
of the Clearing-House Mechanism”; and Informal Working Group III addressing 
issues falling under cluster III, entitled “Financial rules, and financial resources and 
mechanism”. The Commission continued this approach during the second and third 
sessions. 
12. To advance its work, the Preparatory Commission decided to hold parallel 
meetings during the second and third sessions. To ensure that all delegations were 
informed of, and had opportunities to engage in, the issues considered in the parallel 
meetings, the Commission decided that there would be regular reporting back to the 
plenary on the work of the parallel meetings.
D. Documentation
13. The documents of the Preparatory Commission are listed in annex XI to the 
present report.
14. In addition, a number of informal documents were circulated ahead of, or 
during, the sessions of the Commission as reflected in section E below.
E. Proceedings of the sessions of the Preparatory Commission
__________________
2 In accordance with article 68 of the Agreement, the Agreement entered into force on 17 
January 2026, namely 120 days after the deposit of the sixtieth instrument of 
ratification, approval, acceptance or accession.
4/80
1. Organizational meeting
15. At its organizational meeting, held from 24 to 26 June 2024, the Preparatory 
Commission held six plenary meetings.
16. At the beginning of the meeting, on 24 June 2024, the Under-Secretary-General 
for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, Miguel de Serpa Soares, 
delivered opening remarks, which were followed by general statements from 
delegations. 
17. The Preparatory Commission adopted the agenda for the organizational meeting 
(A/AC.296/2024/1) and the organization of work of the organizational meeting 
(A/AC.296/2024/2) without amendment.
18. Discussions on the programme of work of the Preparatory Commission 
proceeded on the basis of a note by the Secretariat on matters to be addressed at the 
first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement (A/AC.296/2024/3). 
The Commission decided to request that the Co-Chairs, in consultation with the 
Bureau, prepare the provisional programme of work of the Commission on the basis 
of the three clusters of issues discussed during the organizational meeting, which 
included matters to be addressed by the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement 
as expressly set out therein, as well as additional matters identified during the 
organizational meeting that may be addressed at an early stage by the Conference of 
the Parties to the Agreement. The Commission also agreed that the agenda of its 
substantive sessions would not include any item on general statements.
19. During the organizational meeting, the Preparatory Commission further 
considered its modalities of work and the dates of its substantive sessions and decided 
to request that the Co-Chairs identify the required documentation for the first and 
second substantive sessions, in consultation with the Bureau and with the support of 
the Secretariat. 
20. On 26 June 2024, the meeting heard a closing statement delivered by the CoChair of the Preparatory Commission, Janine Coye-Felson (A/AC.296/2024/4).
2. First session
21. The first session of the Preparatory Commission was held from 14 to 25 April 
2025.
22. At the beginning of the session, on 14 April 2025, the Co-Chairs of the 
Preparatory Commission, Janine Coye-Felson and Adam McCarthy, and the UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, Elinor 
Hammarskjöld, delivered opening remarks. 
23. The Commission adopted the agenda of the Preparatory Commission 
(A/AC.296/2025/1) and the programme of work of the Preparatory Commission
(A/AC.296/2025/2), on the understanding that both would apply to the entire 
Commission and would not be specific to each session.
24. The Preparatory Commission subsequently considered the proposed 
organization of work, developed by the Co-Chairs, in consultation with the Bureau. 
The Commission agreed that it would consider item 5 of the agenda, entitled 
“Consideration of matters to be addressed by the Conference of the Parties to the 
Agreement at its first meeting and additional matters, as identified by the Preparatory 
Commission”, in the format of informal working groups, and proceeded to the 
5/80
establishment of three such groups corresponding to the three clusters of issues 
discussed during its organizational meeting.
25. The informal working groups, facilitated by the Co-Chairs of the Preparatory 
Commission, met from 14 to 25 April 2025, proceeding with their discussions on the 
basis of the three aids to discussions and negotiations prepared by the Co-Chairs 
(A/AC.296/2025/3, A/AC.296/2025/7 and A/AC.296/2025/8) and the three notes by 
the Secretariat (A/AC.296/2025/4, A/AC.296/2025/5 and A/AC.296/2025/6), as well 
as guiding questions circulated by the Co-Chairs in advance of the meeting and made 
available on the website of the Agreement.
3 Additionally, on 21 and 25 April, the CoChairs delivered, in plenary, oral reports on the discussions held in the informal 
working groups during the first and second weeks, respectively, of the first session, 
which were also made available on the website of the Agreement.
4
26. In considering the way forward in terms of additional documentation to be 
prepared during the period between the first and second sessions of the Preparatory 
Commission on the issues falling under item 5, the Co-Chairs undertook to prepare 
revised versions of the three aids to discussions and negotiations for consideration by 
the Commission at its second session, addressing the rules of procedure of the 
Conference of the Parties, the financial rules governing the funding of the Conference 
of the Parties and the funding of the secretariat and any subsidiary bodies, as well as 
arrangements with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to give effect to the 
relevant provisions on funding. The Co-Chairs also invited delegations to provide any 
additional input in writing within the indicated deadline.5
27. With regard to the terms of reference and modalities for the operation of, and 
rules of procedure for, the subsidiary bodies and the selection process for the members 
of the Scientific and Technical Body and the other subsidiary bodies, the Co-Chairs 
were requested to produce a matrix outlining, for each subsidiary body, in a 
comparative format, potential and non-exhaustive options, reflecting input provided 
during the discussions, to help with visualizing the state of discussions and to provide 
an aid to assist States in working further towards convergence on those issues. 
28. Furthermore, the Secretariat was requested to prepare a document on the 
arrangements for the secretariats of selected instruments representative of each of the 
models outlined in the note prepared by the Secretariat for the first session. I n this 
regard, it was agreed that the document would take the form of a matrix to allow for 
the comparison of each model and would provide factual information, without 
containing any recommendations, analysis or assessment of the merits of the various 
models. 
29. Lastly, with respect to issues pertaining to the operation of the Clearing-House 
Mechanism, the Co-Chairs, taking into account the input provided during the session, 
were requested to prepare draft terms of reference for a group involving experts. The 
Co-Chairs invited delegations wishing to further inform the preparation of the draft 
terms of reference to provide written input within the indicated timeline. 6
Additionally, the Secretariat was requested to prepare a flow chart outlining the 
__________________
3 https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/sites/default/files/2025-
04/20250325GuidingQuestionsFinal.pdf.
4 https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/en/meetings/preparatory-commission/documents/firstSession.
5 Available at https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/en/prepcom-i-statements-and-written-input.
6
Ibid.
6/80
functions of the Mechanism and its possible linkages with other institutional 
arrangements established under the Agreement. 
30. On 24 April, the Preparatory Commission held in plenary a preliminary 
exchange of views on matters to be considered under item 5 at its second session, in 
accordance with the programme of work of the Commission. 
31. The Co-Chairs of the Preparatory Commission issued a statement at the 
closing of the first session (A/AC.296/2025/9).
3. Second session
32. The second session of the Preparatory Commission was held from 18 to 29 
August 2025.
33. At the beginning of the session, on 18 August, the Co-Chairs of the Preparatory 
Commission, Janine Coye-Felson and Adam McCarthy, and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, Elinor Hammarskjöld, 
delivered opening remarks. 
34. In line with the approach taken at its first session, the Preparatory Commission 
considered item 5 of the agenda, entitled “Consideration of the matters to be 
addressed by the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement at its first meeting and 
additional matters, as identified by the Preparatory Commission”, in the format of 
informal working groups. Informal informals were also held to help advance 
discussions on some of the issues considered under agenda item 5. 
35. The informal working groups, facilitated by the Co-Chairs, met from 18 to 29
April 2025, with parallel meetings held on 18, 20–22 and 26-27 August.
36. Discussions in the informal working groups proceeded on the basis of three 
revised aids to discussions and negotiations prepared by the Co-Chairs
(A/AC.296/2025/12, A/AC.296/2025/13 and A/AC.296/2025/14), two notes by the 
Co-Chairs (A/AC.296/2025/15 and A/AC.296/2025/INF/3), four notes by the 
Secretariat (A/AC.296/2025/16, A/AC.296/2025/17, A/AC.296/2025/18
and A/AC.296/2025/INF/4), as well as guiding questions circulated by the Co-Chairs 
in advance of the meeting,
7
and a number of documents circulated during the session.
37. With regard to the rules of procedure for the Conference of the Parties, the 
Preparatory Commission completed a reading of the revised aid to discussions and 
negotiations prepared by the Co-Chairs (A/AC.296/2025/12). It subsequently 
completed a reading of the refreshed text of draft rules of procedure for the 
Conference of the Parties (A/AC.296/2025/CRP.3), issued during the session. On the 
way forward, the Co-Chairs were requested to prepare a further revised aid for 
consideration by the Commission at its third session, taking into account the input 
received during the second session. To inform the preparation of the further revised 
aid, delegations were invited to provide their input in writing within the indicated 
deadline.
8
38. The Preparatory Commission also considered the matrix on the terms of 
reference and modalities for the operation of, and rules of procedure for, the 
subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement, contained in a note prepared by 
the Co-Chairs on the matter (A/AC.296/2025/INF/3). During the session, the Co-
__________________
7 Available at https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/sites/default/files/2025-
07/20250729BBNJPrepComIIGuidingQuestions.pdf
8 Available at https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/en/prepcom-ii-statements-and-written-input.
7/80
Chairs issued a working document containing draft model terms of reference and 
modalities for the operation of the Scientific and Technical Body established under 
the Agreement. On the way forward, the Co-Chairs were requested to develop, during 
the intersessional period, a consolidated aid to negotiations with regard to the 
Scientific and Technical Body and the other subsidiary bodies, for consideration at 
the third session of the Preparatory Commission.
39. Regarding arrangements for the functioning of the secretariat, including its seat,
deliberations began on the basis of the matrix on the arrangements for the secretariats 
of selected instruments representative of each of the secretariat models, contained in 
a note prepared by the Secretariat in advance of the session (A/AC.296/2025/INF/4).
A Co-Chairs’ document, entitled “Overview of proposed elements for arrangements 
for the functioning of the secretariat”, was circulated during the session. The CoChairs were requested to consult with the Secretariat on the most efficient and 
appropriate way to obtain information on the various elements discussed during the 
session, including concerning the implications of a potential link between the 
secretariat to be established under article 50 of the Agreement and the United Nations.
With regard to the selection of the seat of the secretariat, following an exchange of 
views held in the format of informal informals, the Co-Chairs were requested to invite
States interested in hosting the secretariat to provide information on their offer, having 
regard to the elements discussed during the session, and to make that information 
available to delegations sufficiently in advance of its third session.
40. Discussions on arrangements to enhance cooperation with relevant legal 
instruments and frameworks and relevant global, regional, subregional and sectoral 
bodies, proceeded on the basis of a note prepared by the Secretariat
(A/AC.296/2025/16). The deliberations of the Preparatory Commission on the matter 
were also informed by the input from relevant legal instruments and frameworks and 
relevant global, regional, subregional and sectoral bodies, which had been received 
in response to an open call issued by the Division ahead of the second session to
collect information with regard to the nature, scope and modalities of existing 
cooperative arrangements that could be of relevance for future cooperative 
arrangements under the Agreement.
9 With regard to the way forward, the Co-Chairs, 
taking into account those discussions, and any additional input from delegations after 
the session within the indicated deadline,
10 were requested to prepare a draft decision 
providing guidance on cooperation with relevant instruments, frameworks and bodies, 
for consideration at the third session of the Preparatory Commission. 
41. On reporting requirements pursuant to the Agreement, the Preparatory 
Commission held an exchange of views on the basis of a note prepared by the 
Secretariat on the matter (A/AC.296/2025/17). The Co-Chairs were requested to distil
the discussions on the matter into key points on reporting to be conveyed to the 
Conference of the Parties. 
42. Concerning the modalities for the operation of the Clearing-House Mechanism, 
the Preparatory Commission completed a reading of the draft terms of reference for 
an informal group on the technical aspects of the operationalization of the 
Mechanism, contained in a note prepared by the Co-Chairs in advance of the meeting
(A/AC.296/2025/15). During the session, revised draft terms of reference 
(A/AC.296/2025/CRP.2) were issued and considered by the Commission, including
through a focus group, co-facilitated by Barbados and the United Kingdom of Great 
__________________
9 Available at https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/en/prepcom-ii-ifb-cooperation.
10 Available at https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/en/prepcom-ii-statements-and-written-input.
8/80
Britain and Northern Ireland, on the size and composition of such an informal group . 
As the focus group did not reach a conclusion, and with a view to delivering on the 
tasks expected to be completed by the third session of the Commission to support the 
operationalization of the Clearing-House Mechanism, the Co-Chairs were requested 
to work with the Secretariat and consult with the Bureau on the modalities to move 
forward.
43. With regard to the financial rules governing the funding of the Conference of 
the Parties and the funding of the secretariat and any subsidiary bodies, the 
Preparatory Commission completed a reading of the revised aid to discussions and 
negotiations prepared by the Co-Chairs in advance of the meeting
(A/AC.296/2025/13). It subsequently considered a refreshed text of draft financial 
rules (A/AC.296/2025/CRP.4), issued during the session. With regard to the way 
forward, the Commission requested that the Co-Chairs, taking into account the input 
received during the second session and any additional input from delegations during 
the intersessional period, within the indicated deadline,11 prepare a further revised aid 
for consideration by the Commission at its third session. 
44. Regarding arrangements with the GEF to give effect to the relevant provisions 
on funding, the Preparatory Commission completed a reading of the revised aid to 
discussions and negotiations prepared by the Co-Chairs concerning a draft 
memorandum of understanding between the Conference of the Parties and the GEF 
Council (A/AC.296/2025/14). It subsequently considered the refreshed text of a draft 
memorandum of understanding (A/AC.296/2025/CRP.1), issued during the session.
On the way forward, the Co-Chairs were requested to prepare a further revised aid for 
consideration by the Commission at its third session. To inform its preparation, 
delegations were invited to submit input in writing within the indicated deadline.12
45. The Preparatory Commission considered the operationalization of provisions on 
financial resources and mechanism other than the arrangements with GEF on the basis 
of a note prepared by the Secretariat (A/AC.296/2025/18). Regarding the special fund,
the deliberations further proceeded on the basis of a Co-Chairs’ document, entitled 
“Possible elements of a process for the operationalization of the special fund” , which 
was circulated during the session. Regarding the way forward, the Co-Chairs were
requested to prepare a draft decision of the Conference of the Parties for the purpose 
of operationalizing the special fund. With regard to the voluntary trust fund, a 
preliminary exchange of views was held on a Co-Chairs’ document, entitled “Draft 
elements for the terms of reference of the voluntary trust fund established under the 
Agreement”, circulated during the session, including regarding the interplay between 
this issue and the draft financial rules and other issues under consideration. The 
Commission also exchanged preliminary views on the scale of assessed contributions, 
as well as on guidance on overall strategies, policies, programme priorities and 
eligibility for access to and utilization of financial resources, on the understanding that
further discussions would be required on both matters. 
46. Under other matters, the Preparatory Commission, meeting in a plenary setting, 
held an initial exchange of views and subsequently considered the possibility for the 
Commission to provide provisional guidance to GEF for the interim period until the 
Conference of the Parties is able to provide guidance on overall strategies, policies, 
programme priorities and eligibility for access to and utilization of financial resources, 
as foreseen in article 52, paragraph 9, of the Agreement. Discussions proceeded on the 
__________________
11 Ibid.
12 Ibid.
9/80
basis of a Co-Chairs’ document, entitled “Elements of possible provisional guidance 
to the Global Environment Facility ninth replenishment process”, which was circulated
during the session, and concluded that the Co-Chairs, in consultation with the Bureau, 
would reflect on the way forward, bearing in mind the timeline for the GEF ninth 
replenishment process.
13
47. The Co-Chairs issued a statement at the closing of the second session of the 
Preparatory Commission (A/AC.296/2025/19).
4. Third session
48. The third session of the Preparatory Commission was held from 23 March to 2 
April 2026.
49. In accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 78/272, after 20 September 2025 
or the date of entry into force of the Agreement, whichever came earlier, the taking 
of decisions by the Commission was only by States and regional economic integration 
organizations that had signed the Agreement or had ratified, approved, accepted or 
acceded to the Agreement. 
50. At the beginning of the session, on 23 March, the Co-Chairs of the Preparatory 
Commission, Janine Coye-Felson and Adam McCarthy, and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs, Steven Hill, delivered opening remarks. 
51. Regarding the dates of the first meeting of the Conference to the Parties to the 
Agreement, the Co-Chairs informed the Preparatory Commission that, pursuant to 
General Assembly resolution 80/107, and following consultations with the Bureau, 
they would recommend to the Secretary-General that the first meeting be convened 
from 11 to 22 January 2027 at United Nations Headquarters.
52. The Co-Chairs proposed an oral revision to the agenda of the Preparatory 
Commission, which was adopted. The revised agenda (A/AC.296/2025/1/Rev.1) was 
issued on 24 March 2026.
53. The Preparatory Commission, meeting in the format of informal working 
groups, continued its consideration of item 5 of the agenda, entitled “Consideration 
of the matters to be addressed by the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement at 
its first meeting and additional matters, as identified by the Preparatory Commission ”. 
54. The informal working groups, facilitated by the Co-Chairs, met from 23 March 
to 1 April 2026, with parallel meetings held each day, and with regular reporting back 
to the plenary on the work of the parallel meetings. During the session, a number of 
informal informals were also held to help advance discussions on issues under item 5
of the agenda.
55. Discussions in informal working groups proceeded on the basis of three further 
revised aids to discussions and negotiations prepared by the Co-Chairs
(A/AC.296/2026/1, A/AC.296/2026/2, A/AC.296/2026/7), two aids to discussions 
and negotiations also prepared the Co-Chairs (A/AC.296/2026/3, A/AC.296/2026/5), 
a draft decision of the Conference of the Parties prepared by the Co-Chairs
(A/AC.296/2026/4), a note by the Co-Chairs (A/AC.296/2026/6), a note by the 
Secretariat (A/AC.296/2026/8), as well as a number of documents issued or circulated 
__________________
13 In the intersessional period between the second and third sessions of the Commission, the CoChairs, following consultations with the Bureau, communicated to the Chairperson of the GEF
general provisional guidance to inform the process of the ninth replenishment of the GEF Trust 
Fund in relation to support related to the Agreement.
10/80
during the session. The Commission also heard presentations by the States offering
to host the secretariat to be established under article 50 of the Agreement, namely
Belgium, Chile and China, each followed by a question-and-answer segment during 
which those States responded to questions from delegations.
14
56. With regard to the rules of procedure for the Conference of the Parties, the 
Preparatory Commission completed a reading of the further revised aid to discussions 
and negotiations prepared by the Co-Chairs (A/AC.296/2026/1). It subsequently 
completed a reading of the draft rules of procedure for the Conference of the Parties
(A/AC.296/2026/CRP.1), issued during the session. A revised version of the draft 
rules (A/AC.296/2026/CRP.1/Rev.1) was subsequently issued for consideration by the 
Commission. This included text on draft rule 39 bis (draft rule 41 of annex I to the 
present report), which had been the subject of informal informal consultations, with 
the Co-Chairs noting that, in their view, it reflected the best prospect of garnering 
widespread support. At the final meeting of the Commission, on 2 April 2026, under 
item 8 of the agenda, entitled “Adoption of the report of the Preparatory 
Commission”, following further consultations among delegations, the Commission 
agreed to amend the document. In respect of draft rule 6 (draft rule 8 of annex I to the 
present report), paragraph 2(c), additional text was added at the end of the paragraph
to read: “…, such decision being a decision on a question of procedure under rule 47
of the present rules.”. Draft rule 34, paragraph 2, was amended to read: “Quorum shall 
be determined on the basis of the number of votes that are entitled to be cast on a 
decision.”. Draft rule 44 (draft rule 46 of annex I to the present report) was amended 
to read: “The rights of the Parties to vote are as provided for in article 64 of the 
Agreement.” The daft rules of procedure recommended by the Commission to the 
Conference of the Parties to the Agreement for consideration, are contained in annex 
I to the present report. 
57. At the final meeting of the Preparatory Commission on 2 April 2026, under item 
8 of the agenda, a number of States that have signed the Agreement or have ratified, 
approved, accepted or acceded to it made statements in explanation of position 
concerning the draft rules of procedure before the adoption of the report, namely 
__________________
14 Available at https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/en/third-session-23-march-2-april-2026
11/80
Brazil,
15
 Japan, 16 Indonesia, 17 Chile, 18 Türkiye, 19 the Philippines, 20 Egypt,
21
 India 22
and Argentina.
23 Some of these States indicated that further efforts would be needed
to ensure the adoption of the rules of procedure by consensus at the first meeting of 
the Conference of the Parties, consistent with the Agreement. Two States that have 
not signed the Agreement and have not ratified, approved, accepted or acceded to it
also expressed their views concerning the draft rules of procedure before the adoption 
__________________
15 With respect to draft rule 39 bis (draft rule 41 of annex I to the present report), Brazil 
reiterated that, in its view, the inclusion of such a rule was of critical importance in order to 
effectively operationalize article 18 of the Agreement. It noted that there had not been sufficient 
time to consider the proposed text and reserved its right to revert to this matter in due course,
bearing in mind that the final decision rests with the Conference of the Parties.
16 Japan reserved its position on draft rule 44 (draft rule 46 of annex I to the present report), 
paragraph 2, draft rule 34, paragraph 2, and draft rule 51 (draft rule 53 of annex I to the present 
report), paragraph 1. It requested that the following be re-inserted at the end of draft rule 51
(draft rule 53 of annex I to the present report), paragraph 1: “Any Party may request a secret 
ballot. The President shall ask whether the request is seconded. If it is seconded by ten or more 
Parties, the vote shall be by secret ballot.”
17 Indonesia objected to the formulation in draft rule 6 (draft rule 8 of annex I to the present 
report), paragraph 1, regarding Indigenous Peoples and local communities, noting that it deviated 
from, or was inconsistent with, the formulation in article 48, paragraph 4, of the Agreement.
18 Chile noted that there had not been sufficient time to consider the proposed wording for draft 
rule 39 bis (draft rule 41 of annex I to the present report) and reserved its right to revert to draft 
rule 39 bis (draft rule 41 of annex I to the present report) in due course, noting that it understood 
that the operationalization of article 18 should also be considered in the respective coordination 
of the effective use of this rule in the context of proposals for the establishment of area-based 
management tools.
19 On draft rule 6 (draft rule 8 of annex I to the present report), paragraph 2(c), Türkiye 
supported maintaining the principle of the non-objection procedure. On draft rule 44 (draft rule 
46 of annex I to the present report), paragraph 2, it reiterated its preference for the retention of 
the bracketed text “present and voting”. On draft rule 51 (draft rule 53 of annex I to the present 
report), paragraph 1, it expressed concern that the latest version of the text omitted any reference 
to the possibility of a secret ballot and that the support expressed for maintaining a low threshold 
for seconding requests had not been reflected in the text.
20 The Philippines observed that the rules of procedures remained subordinate to the Agreement, 
which meant they could not alter, reinterpret or condition the substantive balance reflected in the 
Agreement. It further noted its understanding that any reference to article 18 of the Agreement in 
the rules of procedure did not create new rights, did not introduce any form of veto or a blocking 
effect, and did not preclude the Conference of the Parties from considering matters within its 
mandate. It considered that any relevant notifications should be understood as contributing to 
transparency without affecting the ability of the Conference of the Parties to proceed in 
accordance with the Agreement.
21 In respect of draft rule 34, Egypt stated that it saw merit in having a quorum of two-thirds of 
the Parties in order to take a decision. In respect of draft rule 39 bis (draft rule 41 of annex I to 
the present report), it noted the importance of having clarity on its relation to article 18 of the 
Agreement. In respect of draft rule 44 (draft rule 46 of annex I to the present report), it noted that 
the inclusion of the qualifier “present and voting” was of paramount importance.
22 India stated that the current formulations of draft rules 39 bis (draft rule 41 of annex I to the 
present report) and 60 (draft rule 62 of annex I to the present report) exceeded the scope of 
articles 18 and 47 of the Agreement, respectively, and reserved its right to come back on the text
in due course.
23 With regard to draft rules 34 and 44 (draft rule 46 of annex I to the present report), Argentina 
stated that the provisions on the determination of quorum and voting should include the phrase 
“present and voting”. It reserved its position on draft rule 39 bis (draft rule 41 of annex I to the 
present report), noting that there needed to be more correlation between paragraphs 2 and 3 to be 
able to conclude that it would not be possible for the Conference of the Parties to make decisions 
on proposals that had been objected to. It noted that it also had not had time to consider 
alternatives to the deletion of references to article 6 of the Agreement in section IV of the draft 
rules of procedure, for example a chapeau or an additional rule that would refer to article 6.
12/80
of the report, namely El Salvador24 and Saudi Arabia.
25 Paraguay, on behalf of a group 
of landlocked developing countries, also made a statement.
26
58. On the terms of reference and modalities for the operation of, and rules of 
procedure for, the subsidiary bodies, including the selection process for 
their members, the Preparatory Commission completed a reading of the aid to 
discussions and negotiations prepared by the Co-Chairs (A/AC.296/2026/3). The 
Commission then considered the draft terms of reference and modalities for the 
operation of, and rules of procedure for, the subsidiary bodies
(A/AC.296/2026/CRP.2), which was issued during the session. A revised version of 
the document was subsequently issued for consideration by the Commission
(A/AC.296/2026/CRP.2/Rev.1 and A/AC.296/2026/CRP.2/Rev.1/Corr.1). The draft 
document recommended by the Commission to the Conference of the Parties to the 
Agreement for consideration is contained in annex II to the present report.
Additionally, during the Preparatory Commission, there was a strong interest by 
several groups and delegations to consider the question of the establishment of an
Advisory Mechanism on Indigenous Peoples, Local Communities, and Traditional 
Knowledge at the first meeting of the Conference of Parties, and a group undertook 
to carry out intersessional work in that regard. 27
59. With regard to arrangements for the functioning of the secretariat, including its 
seat, the Preparatory Commission began its discussions on the basis of a note prepared 
by the Secretariat on the matter (A/AC.296/2026/8). A Co-Chairs’ non-paper on 
arrangements for the functioning of the secretariat established under the Agreement 
was circulated during the session. The Commission subsequently considered a draft 
decision of the Conference of the Parties concerning the relationship of the secretariat 
established under article 50 of the Agreement and the United Nations
(A/AC.296/2026/CRP.8). At the final meeting of the Commission, on 2 April 2026, 
under item 8 of the agenda, the draft decision was amended following further 
consultations among delegations. Paragraph 5 under option I, or paragraph 3 under 
option II, was amended to read: “… the head of the secretariat shall serve for a 4-year 
term…”. The draft decision recommended by the Commission to the Conference of 
the Parties to the Agreement for consideration is contained in annex III to the present 
report. Regarding the selection of the seat of the secretariat, the Commission 
considered a draft decision for consideration by the first meeting of the Conference 
of the Parties to the Agreement on modalities for the decision on the seat of the 
secretariat issued during the session (A/AC.296/2026/CRP.9). The draft decision
__________________
24 El Salvador reiterated its view concerning the importance of the operationalization of article 
18 of the Agreement through draft rule 39 bis (draft rule 41 of annex I to the present report) of 
the rules of procedure. It noted that it continued to consider that all States, whether they were 
Party or not to the Agreement, could object to the establishment of measures such as area -based 
management tools, including marine protected areas, in areas under national jurisdiction where 
there are claims to sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction, including in respect of any 
disputes relating thereto, pursuant to article 18 of the Agreement.
25 Saudi Arabia expressed its reservation concerning several provisions of the draft rules of 
procedure, in particular draft rules 34, 44 (draft rule 46 of annex I to the present report), 39 bis
(draft rule 41 of annex I to the present report), and 60 (draft rule 62 of annex I to the present 
report), requesting the retention of the previous texts of these draft rules.
26 Paraguay requested the inclusion of a seat in the Bureau for landlocked developing countries in 
draft rule 22 (draft rule 25 of annex I to the present report), paragraph 2, in line with article 7, 
paragraph (n), of the Agreement.
27 See proposal submitted by the Pacific Small Island Developing States, available at: 
https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/sites/default/files/202512/PSIDS_AdvMechIPLCAndTK_13D
ec.pdf
13/80
recommended by the Commission to the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement 
for consideration is contained in annex IV to the present report. The Commission also 
decided, without prejudice to the final decision of the Conference of the Parties on 
the type of relationship that may be established between the United Nations and the 
secretariat, to request the Secretary-General to propose, in advance of the first 
meeting of the Conference of the Parties, arrangements for consideration at that 
meeting, outlining the scope of administrative support that could be provided by the 
United Nations, concerning a number of aspects, and requested the Co-Chairs to 
convey this request by letter. Draft excerpts of such a letter were discussed during the 
session.
60. Concerning the modalities for the operation of the Clearing-House Mechanism,
the Preparatory Commission considered a consolidated draft study on the technical 
aspects of the operationalization of the Clearing-House Mechanism, prepared through 
a consultancy under the supervision of the Division and circulated to delegations in 
advance of the session. A number of informal informals, co-facilitated by Palau and 
New Zealand, were held during the session to explore the way forward, including to 
identify possible work to be carried out during the intersessional period following the 
conclusion of the third session and in the lead-up to the first meeting of the 
Conference of the Parties. A document was developed in that context to reflect the 
outcome of these informal informals.
28 The Commission decided to entrust the CoChairs with the undertaking of further intersessional work, to be carried out under the
Co-Chairs’ authority, in consultation with the Bureau and with the support of the 
Division, taking into consideration that document, and to report thereon to the first 
meeting of the Conference of the Parties.
61. On the financial rules governing the funding of the Conference of the Parties 
and the funding of the secretariat and any subsidiary bodies, the Preparatory 
Commission completed a reading of the further revised aid to discussions and 
negotiations prepared by the Co-Chairs (A/AC.296/2025/2). The Commission then
considered the draft financial rules (A/AC.296/2025/CRP.3) issued during the 
session. A revised version of the draft rules was subsequently issued
(A/AC.296/2026/CRP.3/Rev.1 and A/AC.296/2026/CRP.3/Rev.1/Corr.1) for 
consideration by the Commission. The draft financial rules recommended by the 
Commission to the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement for consideration are
contained in annex V to the present report.
62. Regarding arrangements with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to give 
effect to the relevant provisions on funding, the Preparatory Commission completed 
a reading of the further revised aid to discussions and negotiations prepared by the 
Co-Chairs concerning a draft memorandum of understanding between the Conference 
of the Parties and the GEF Council (A/AC.296/2026/7). The Commission then 
considered the draft memorandum of understanding (A/AC.296/2026/CRP.4), issued
during the session. A revised version of the draft memorandum was subsequently 
issued (A/AC.296/2026/CRP.4/Rev.1 and A/AC.296/2026/CRP.4/Rev.1/Corr.1) for 
consideration by the Commission. The draft memorandum of understanding
recommended by the Commission to the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement 
for consideration and to be forwarded to the GEF Council for its consideration, prior 
to its consideration by the Conference of the Parties, is contained in annex VI to the 
present report.
__________________
28 Available at: https://www.un.org/bbnjagreement/sites/default/files/2026-
04/CHMInformalDiscussionOutcome.pdf.
14/80
63. Concerning arrangements to enhance cooperation with relevant legal 
instruments and frameworks and relevant global, regional, subregional and sectoral 
bodies, the Preparatory Commission completed a reading of a draft decision of the 
Conference of the Parties prepared by the Co-Chairs (A/AC.296/2026/4). 
Subsequently, the Commission considered a revised draft decision 
(A/AC.296/2026/CRP.6), issued during the session. A further revised draft decision 
was subsequently issued (A/AC.296/2026/CRP.6/Rev.1) for consideration by the 
Commission. The draft decision recommended by the Commission to the Conference 
of the Parties to the Agreement for consideration is contained in annex VII to the 
present report.
64. With regard to the operationalization of provisions on financial resources and 
mechanism other than those related to arrangements between the Conference of the 
Parties and the Global Environment Facility, the Preparatory Commission began its 
discussions on the basis of the aid to discussions and negotiations prepared by the CoChairs concerning the establishment of the voluntary trust fund as part of the financial 
mechanism (A/AC.296/2026/5) and the note by the Co-Chairs concerning a draft 
decision of the Conference of the Parties for the purpose of operationalizing the 
special fund (A/AC.296/2026/6). The Commission then completed a reading of the
draft decision for the purpose of operationalizing the special fund, circulated during 
the session. A revised version of the draft decision (A/AC.296/2026/CRP.11) was 
subsequently issued for consideration by the Commission. Further informal 
consultations were conducted among delegations on the document, during which 
further convergence was reached on the text of the draft decision and subsequently 
communicated to the Co-Chairs.
29
 The draft decision recommended by the 
Commission to the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement for consideration is 
contained in annex VIII to the present report. Regarding the voluntary trust fund, the 
Commission completed a reading of the draft text of potential terms of reference. It 
then considered the draft terms of reference for the voluntary trust fund under the 
Agreement (A/AC.296/2026/CRP.10), which were issued during the session. Further 
informal consultations were conducted among delegations on the document, during 
which further convergence was reached on the text of the draft decision and 
subsequently communicated to the Co-Chairs.
30
 The draft terms of reference 
recommended by the Commission to the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement 
for consideration are contained in annex IX to the present report.
65. On reporting requirements under the Agreement, the Co-Chairs informed 
delegations that, as requested by the Preparatory Commission at its second session, 
they had distilled the discussions on the matter held during that session into key points 
to be conveyed to the Conference of the Parties. Accordingly, a document containing 
key elements on reporting requirements under the Agreement 
(A/AC.296/2026/CRP.7) was issued. The document recommended by the 
Commission to the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement for consideration is 
contained in annex X to the present report. 
66. At the final meeting of the Preparatory Commission on 2 April 2026, under item 
8 of the agenda, one State that has not signed the Agreement and has not ratified, 
__________________
29 The outcome of these informal consultations as conveyed to the Co-Chairs is as follows: the 
bracketed text in paragraphs 8 and 9 of the draft decision would be removed. 
30 The outcome of these informal consultations among delegations, as conveyed to the Co-Chairs, 
is as follows: the brackets in paragraph 5 would be removed; the wording in paragraph 6 would 
be amended to read “…up to two representatives for each developing State Party in particular 
least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing 
States…”; and subparagraph (a) of paragraph 9 would be moved to the end of paragraph 10.
15/80
approved, accepted or acceded to it expressed its views concerning the documents 
before the adoption of the report, namely the Islamic Republic of Iran, requesting that 
its statement be included in the report of the Commission. 31
III. Credentials
67. At the organizational meeting, the first and second substantive sessions, the 
Preparatory Commission decided to postpone the consideration of the appointment of 
the Credentials Committee under item 4 of the agenda entitled “Appointment of
members of the credentials committee” to a later time. As a result, consideration of 
agenda item 6, “Credentials of representatives”, was also postponed.
68. At its third session, the Preparatory Commission, under item 4 of the agenda,
decided to entrust the Co-Chairs, with the support of the Secretariat, to review the 
credentials of representatives to the Preparatory Commission and report thereon to 
the Commission. 
69. On 1 and 2 April 2026, the Commission heard, under item 6 of the agenda, the 
oral reports of the Co-Chairs on the review of the credentials of representatives to the 
Preparatory Commission, noting that formal credentials had been received from a 
total of 100 States and from the European Union, of which 91 were from States and 
one from the regional economic integration organization having signed the Agreement 
or having ratified, approved, accepted or acceded to the Agreement. Information 
concerning the appointment of representatives to the Commission communicated to 
the Secretary-General by means of a copy of formal credentials signed by the Head 
of State or Government or the Minister for Foreign Affairs, or by means of a letter or 
note verbale from the Permanent Mission concerned had been received from a total 
of 50 States, of which 39 were from States that have signed the Agreement or have 
ratified, approved, accepted or acceded to it. The Commission took note of the oral 
reports of the Co-Chairs and of the information presented.
IV. Attendance
__________________
31 The Islamic Republic of Iran noted that it could not support certain provisions in the 
documents presented to the Preparatory Commission. In its view, given the modalities set out in 
General Assembly resolution 78/272, no report, outcome or deliberation of the meeting could be 
construed as to prejudice the principled positions of the Islamic Republic of Iran in re lation to 
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and its positions on other contentious 
matters including those in relation to rules of procedure, various financials rules and terms of 
references, and arrangements with GEF, among others. It further noted that contentious matters 
that have been referred to in the documents of the Commission or are not consistent with the 
position of its delegation could not be considered as setting precedent for any other forum nor as 
support of or acceptance of such matters by its delegation, these including but not being limited 
to matters related to participation of observers, in particular non-governmental organizations and 
other similar entities, virtual meetings, certain aspects of financial rules, emergency measures, 
voting for regional economic integration organizations, terms of references, and cooperation with 
other relevant legal instruments. It reiterated its position regarding the Convention and 
reemphasized that the participation of its delegation in the work of the Commission or the 
documents of the Commission, including the decision contained in document 
A/AC.296/2026/CRP.6/Rev.1, in particular draft preambular paragraph 2, did not affect nor 
prejudice the legal status, rights, and prerogatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran as a non -party 
to the Convention and any other related agreements with regard to that Convention and could not 
prejudice its sovereign rights in any manner.
16/80
70. Participants in the sessions of the Preparatory Commission included 
representatives of 161 States Members of the United Nations, members of the 
specialized agencies and parties to the Convention on the Law of the Sea. In addition, 
33 organizations and other entities that have received a standing invitation to 
participate as observers in the work of the General Assembly pursuant to its relevant 
resolutions, relevant specialized agencies and other organs, organizations, funds and 
programmes of the United Nations system, interested global and regional 
intergovernmental organizations and other interested international bodies, as well as 
100 non-governmental organizations, participated as observers.
V. Recommendations of the Preparatory Commission
71. At its third session, on 2 April 2026, the Preparatory Commission decided to 
recommend to the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement for consideration at its
first meeting the documents contained in annexes I to X to the present report.
VI. Other matters
72. In paragraph 14 of resolution 78/272, the General Assembly requested the 
Secretary-General to continue to administer the voluntary trust fund established 
pursuant to resolution 69/292 for the purpose of assisting developing countries, in 
particular the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small 
island developing States, in attending the meetings of the commission, and authorized 
the Secretary-General to expand the assistance provided by the trust fund to include 
daily subsistence allowance in addition to defraying the costs of economy-class travel, 
limiting requests for assistance from the trust fund to one delegate per State for each 
meeting of the commission. The General Assembly also invited Member States, 
international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations, 
non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make financial 
contributions to the voluntary trust fund. The Secretariat informed the Preparatory
Commission of the status of the voluntary trust fund at the sessions of the 
Commission. During the Preparatory Commission, contributions to the voluntary trust 
fund were made by the following: Chile, Cyprus, the European Union, Finland, 
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,
the Philippines, Portugal, and the High Seas Alliance. A total of 111 individuals
received assistance from the fund to attend the meetings of the Commission.
73. In addition, the Co-Chairs expressed their gratitude to Australia for covering the 
costs of webcast during the second and parts of the third sessions. 
VII. Adoption of the report of the Preparatory Commission
74. At its third session, on 2 April 2026, the Co-Chairs introduced the draft report 
of the Preparatory Commission, including its annexes. At its final meeting the same 
day, the Preparatory Commission adopted its report, as orally amended, without a vote
and on the understanding that the Co-Chairs would finalize it after the session.
17/80
Annex I
Draft rules of procedure for the Conference of the Parties to 
the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the 
Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of 
Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National 
Jurisdiction
I. Scope and definitions
Rule 1
Scope
The present rules of procedure shall apply to any meeting of the Conference of the 
Parties to the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas 
beyond National Jurisdiction convened in accordance with article 47 of the 
Agreement.
Rule 2
Definitions
For the purposes of the present rules:
1. “Agreement” means the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the 
Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological 
Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, adopted in New York on 19 June 
2023.
2. “Chair” means Chair or Co-Chairs, as appropriate.
3. “Conference of the Parties” means the Conference of the Parties established 
under article 47 of the Agreement. 
4. “Meeting” means any ordinary or extraordinary meeting of the Conference of 
the Parties convened in accordance with article 47 of the Agreement. 
5. “Parties present and voting” means Parties present at the meeting in which 
voting takes place and casting an affirmative or negative vote. Parties abstaining from 
voting shall be considered as not voting. 
6. “Party” means a Party as defined in article 1, paragraph 11, of the Agreement. 
7. “President” means the President of the Conference of the Parties elected in 
accordance with paragraphs 1 or 2 of rule 25 of the present rules of procedure. 
8. “Regional economic integration organization” means an organization as defined 
in article 1, paragraph 12, of the Agreement. 
9. “Secretariat” means the secretariat established under article 50 of the 
Agreement. 
18/80
10. “Subsidiary body” means the Access and Benefit-Sharing Committee, 32 the 
Capacity-Building and Transfer of Marine Technology Committee, 33 the Finance 
Committee on financial resources,
34
 the Implementation and Compliance 
Committee35 and the Scientific and Technical Body,36 as well as any subsidiary body 
established pursuant to article 47, paragraph 6 (d), of the Agreement.
II. Meetings
Rule 3
Place of meetings
The Conference of the Parties shall meet at the seat of the secretariat or at United 
Nations Headquarters, unless the Conference of the Parties decides otherwise. 
Rule 4
Modalities of meetings
1. Meetings of the Conference of the Parties shall be held in person. 
2. The secretariat shall make arrangements regarding the submission of 
pre-recorded statements by delegations, unless the Conference of the Parties decides 
otherwise. 
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, in the event of exceptional circumstances that 
render the holding of in-person meetings impracticable, meetings of the Conference 
of the Parties may be held virtually. Any decision that a meeting of the Conference of 
the Parties should be held virtually shall be taken by the President, following 
consultations with the Bureau. 
4. Virtual meetings shall be held through modalities that allow for online 
interactive participation of all Parties on an equitable basis. Such modalities shall be 
communicated to the Parties and observers in advance of the meeting. 
5. The Conference of the Parties shall not take decisions at virtual meetings, except 
as otherwise provided for in rule 5, and decisions on budgetary matters and matters 
that are necessary to allow the secretariat, the Conference of the Parties and its 
subsidiary bodies to continue to function. 
6. The President may propose that the Conference of Parties take the decisions set 
out in paragraph 5, and the modalities for taking such decisions, following 
consultations with the Bureau. 
7. The Conference of Parties may adopt guidance regarding the convening and 
modalities of virtual meetings.
Rule 5
Intersessional decision-making in respect of emergency measures
1. Subject to any consultation pursuant to article 24, paragraph 2, of the 
Agreement, and to procedures and guidance elaborated by the Scientific and 
Technical Body and adopted by the Conference of the Parties pursuant to article 24, 
__________________
32 Article 15, paragraph 1, of the Agreement.
33 Article 46, paragraph 1, of the Agreement.
34 Article 52, paragraph 14, of the Agreement.
35 Article 55, paragraph 1, of the Agreement.
36 Article 49, paragraph 1, of the Agreement.
19/80
paragraph 5, of the Agreement, in case of the proposed adoption of emergency 
measures intersessionally pursuant to article 24, paragraph 3, of the Agreement, the 
President, in consultation with the Bureau, may call a virtual meeting of the 
Conference of the Parties in order that a decision on an emergency measure be taken 
by the Conference of the Parties. 
2. When a virtual meeting is called in order to take a decision on an emergency 
measure, the proposed emergency measure, together with a statement by the President 
stating that the decision is to be taken in a virtual meeting and the date and time and 
other technical details of the virtual meeting, shall be distributed by the secretariat to 
the Parties at least 30 days before the virtual meeting is due to commence.
Rule 6
Date of meetings
1. The initial ordinary meetings of the Conference of the Parties shall be held on 
an annual basis, and shall thereafter be held every two years. The Conference of 
Parties shall, by no later than its fifth ordinary meeting, decide upon the date from 
which ordinary meetings will be held on a biennial basis. Such a decision may be 
deferred once only to the next ordinary meeting.
2. At each ordinary meeting, the Conference of the Parties shall decide on the date, 
duration and venue of the next ordinary meeting. The Conference of the Parties should
endeavour not to hold such meetings at a time that would make the attendance of a 
significant number of delegations difficult.
3. Extraordinary meetings of the Conference of the Parties shall be held at such 
times as may be decided either by a majority of the Parties present and voting at an 
ordinary meeting of the Conference of the Parties or at the written request of any 
Party, provided that, within 90 days of the request being communicated to the Parties 
by the secretariat, it is supported by at least a majority of the Parties.
4. In the case of an extraordinary meeting held at the written request of a Party, it 
shall be held not more than 90 days after the date on which the request is supported 
by at least a majority of the Parties, in accordance with paragraph 3 of the present 
rule.
Rule 7
Notification of meetings
The secretariat shall notify all Parties of the dates and venue of ordinary and 
extraordinary meetings at least 60 days before the meeting in question is due to 
commence. For extraordinary meetings, this time period may be shortened to 30 days.
III. Observers
Rule 8
Observers
1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, representatives of the following may participate 
as observers in the meetings of the Conference of the Parties and of its subsidiary 
bodies in accordance with article 48, paragraph 4, of the Agreement:
(a) States not Party to the Agreement;
(b) Relevant global, regional, subregional and sectoral bodies;
20/80
(c) Indigenous Peoples with relevant traditional knowledge;
(d) Local communities with relevant traditional knowledge;
(e) The scientific community;
(f) Civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders with an interest in 
matters pertaining to the Conference of the Parties.
2. Representatives of States, bodies, entities and stakeholders listed in paragraph 1 
of the present rule shall be accredited as observers through the following procedures: 
(a) Representatives of States falling under subparagraph (a) are entitled to 
participate as observers subject to prior written notification to the head of the 
secretariat; 
(b) Representatives of bodies falling under subparagraph (b) may request to 
participate as observers. Such requests shall be accorded unless at least two thirds of 
the Parties object; 
(c) Representatives of entities and stakeholders falling under subparagraphs (c) to (f) 
may request to participate as observers. Subject to paragraph 3 of the present rule, the 
secretariat shall circulate to the Parties a list of such entities and stakeholders at least 
30 days prior to the meeting of the Conference of the Parties that follows the 
submission of the request, for their consideration on a non-objection basis, following 
which a final decision will be made by the Conference of Parties on participation, 
such decision being a decision on a question of procedure under rule 47 of the present 
rules.
37
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of the present rule, the representatives of the 
following bodies, entities and stakeholders are entitled to participate as observers in 
the meetings of the Conference of the Parties and of its subsidiary bodies, subject to 
prior written notification to the head of the secretariat: 
(a) The United Nations, its specialized agencies and related organizations; 
(b) Bodies, entities and stakeholders that have a standing invitation from the 
General Assembly pursuant to its relevant resolutions to participate, in the capacity 
of observer, in its sessions and work; 
(c) Bodies, entities and stakeholders that are in consultative status with the 
Economic and Social Council in accordance with the provisions of Council resolution 
1996/31 of 25 July 1996;
(d) Bodies, entities and stakeholders that were entitled to participate as observers 
in the intergovernmental conference on an international legally binding instrument 
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and 
sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction or 
in the Preparatory Commission for the Entry into Force of the Agreement under the 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and 
Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 
and the Convening of the First Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the 
Agreement.
__________________
37 The list will include proposed as well as final names. The general basis of any objections, if 
requested by one or more Parties, will be made known to the Conference of Parties and the 
requester.
21/80
(e) Bodies, entities and stakeholders previously accredited as observers through the 
procedure set out in paragraph 2 of the present rule.
4. Observers in the meetings of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary 
bodies shall not take part in decision-making. They shall be entitled to:
(a) Attend meetings of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies; 
(b) Deliver statements at such meetings at the invitation of the President or the 
Chair of the relevant subsidiary body; 
(c) Receive the documents of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary 
bodies;
(d) Submit their views in writing to the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary 
bodies.
5. Participation by representatives of Indigenous Peoples and their organizations 
in all proceedings of the Conference of the Parties and of its subsidiary bodies shall 
align with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples where 
relevant.
Rule 9
Notification by the secretariat
The secretariat shall notify those entitled to participate as observers and those that 
have informed the secretariat of their wish to participate as observers, pursuant to rule 
8 of the present rules of procedure, of the dates and venue of the next meeting, at least 
60 days before the meeting in question is due to commence. For extraordinary 
meetings, this time period may be shortened to 30 days. 
IV. Agenda
Rule 10
Preparation of the provisional agenda
In agreement with the President after consulting with the Bureau, the secretariat shall 
prepare the provisional agenda of each meeting. 
Rule 11
Items on the provisional agenda of ordinary meetings
The provisional agenda of each ordinary meeting shall include, as appropriate: 
(a) Items arising from the articles of the Agreement, including those specified in its 
article 47; 
(b) Items the inclusion of which has been decided at a previous meeting; 
(c) Items referred to in rule 18 of the present rules of procedure; 
(d) The proposed budget and all questions pertaining to accounts and financial 
arrangements; 
(e) Any item proposed by a Party and received by the secretariat before the 
provisional agenda is circulated.
22/80
Rule 12
Distribution of the provisional agenda
For each ordinary meeting, the provisional agenda, together with supporting 
documents, shall be issued in the official languages of the Conference of the Parties, 
distributed by the secretariat to the Parties and made available to observers referred 
to in rule 8 of the present rules at least 45 days before the opening of the meeting. 
Rule 13
Supplementary items
The secretariat shall, in agreement with the President after consulting with the 
Bureau, include any item that is proposed by a Party and has been received by the 
secretariat after the provisional agenda of an ordinary meeting has been distributed, 
but no later than 30 days before the opening of the meeting, in a supplementary 
provisional agenda.
Rule 14
Addition, deletion, deferment or amendment
When adopting the agenda of an ordinary meeting, the Conference of the Parties may 
decide to add, delete, defer or amend items. Only items that are considered by the 
Conference of the Parties to be urgent and important may be added to the agenda.
Rule 15
Adoption of the agenda
At each meeting, the provisional agenda and supplementary provisional agenda shall 
be submitted to the Conference of the Parties for consideration and approval as soon 
as possible after the opening of the meeting.
Rule 16
Agenda of extraordinary meetings
The provisional agenda of an extraordinary meeting shall consist of those items 
proposed for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at an ordinary meeting or 
in the written request for the holding of the extraordinary meeting. It shall be 
distributed to the Parties and made available to observers referred to in rule 8 of the 
present rules at the same time as the notification of the extraordinary meeting. 
Rule 17
Report on administrative, budgetary and financial implications
The secretariat shall report to the Conference of the Parties on the administrative, 
budgetary and financial implications of all substantive agenda items submitted to the 
meeting, before they are considered by it. Unless the Conference of the Parties decides 
otherwise, no such substantive agenda item shall be considered until at least 48 hours 
after the Conference of the Parties has received a report of the secretariat on its 
administrative, budgetary and financial implications. 
Rule 18
Incomplete consideration of items
Any item of the agenda of an ordinary meeting, consideration of which has not been 
completed at the meeting, shall be included automatically in the provisional agenda 
23/80
of the next ordinary meeting, unless otherwise decided by the Conference of the 
Parties.
V. Representation and credentials
Rule 19
Composition of delegations
Each Party participating in a meeting shall be represented by a delegation consisting 
of a head of delegation and such other accredited representatives, alternate 
representatives and advisers as it may require. 
Rule 20
Alternates and advisers
An alternate representative or an adviser may act as a representative upon designation 
by the head of delegation. 
Rule 21
Submission of credentials
The credentials of representatives and the names of alternate representatives and 
advisers shall be submitted to the secretariat, if possible not later than 24 hours after 
the opening of the meeting. Any later change in the composition of the delegation 
shall also be submitted to the secretariat. The credentials shall be issued either by the 
Head of State or Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs or any person 
authorized by either of them, or, in the case of a regional economic integration 
organization, by the competent authority of that organization. 
Rule 22
Examination of credentials
A Credentials Committee shall be appointed at the beginning of each meeting. It shall 
consist of nine members, who shall be appointed by the Conference of the Parties on 
the proposal of the President, after consulting with Parties. The Committee shall elect 
its own officers. It shall examine the credentials of representatives and report to the 
Conference of the Parties without delay.
Rule 23
Provisional participation
Representatives shall be entitled to participate provisionally in the meeting, pending 
a decision by the Conference of the Parties on their credentials.
VI. Officers
Rule 24
Bureau
The President and the Vice-Presidents shall constitute the Bureau, which shall meet 
periodically throughout each meeting to review the progress of the Conference of the 
Parties and its subsidiary bodies and to make recommendations on such progress. It 
shall also meet at such other times, including intersessionally, as the President deems 
24/80
necessary or upon the request of any other of its members. The Chairs of the 
subsidiary bodies may be invited to attend meetings of the Bureau. The Bureau shall 
have a consultative role through which it shall assist the President in the general 
conduct of the work of the Conference of the Parties. The Bureau members shall 
regularly consult with the Parties from their respective groups.
Rule 25
Election of officers
1. At the commencement of the first ordinary meeting of the Conference of the 
Parties, a President and 16 Vice-Presidents, one of whom shall act as Rapporteur, shall 
be elected from among the representatives of the Parties present at the meeting. These 
officers shall serve as the Bureau of the Conference of the Parties. Each of the five 
United Nations regional groups shall be represented by three Bureau members. In 
addition, one Bureau member shall represent the small island developing States and 
one shall represent the least developed countries. These officers shall be elected 
taking into account gender balance, equitable geographical representation and 
adequate representation of developing countries. They shall remain in office until the 
closure of the second ordinary meeting of the Conference of the Parties, including for 
any intervening extraordinary meeting. 
2. At the second and subsequent ordinary meetings of the Conference of the 
Parties, a President and 16 Vice-Presidents, one of whom shall act as Rapporteur, shall 
be elected from among the representatives of the Parties present at the meeting. These 
officers shall serve as the Bureau of the Conference of the Parties. Each of the five 
United Nations regional groups shall be represented by three Bureau members. In 
addition, one Bureau member shall represent the small island developing States and 
one shall represent the least developed countries. These officers shall be elected 
taking into account gender balance, equitable geographical representation and 
adequate representation of developing countries. They shall commence their term of 
office at the closure of the meeting at which they are elected and remain in office until 
the closure of the following ordinary meeting of the Conference of the Parties, 
including for any intervening extraordinary meeting.
3. The offices of the President and Rapporteur shall be subject to equitable rotation 
among the United Nations regional groups. Officers shall serve for a maximum of two 
terms, which may be held consecutively. 
4. The President shall participate in meetings of the Conference of the Parties in 
that capacity and shall not at the same time exercise the rights of a representative of 
a Party. The Party concerned shall designate another representative, who shall be 
entitled to represent the Party in the meetings and to exercise the right to vote. 
5. The Rapporteur shall, in addition to serving as Vice-President of the Conference 
of the Parties, be responsible, with the assistance and support of the secretariat, for 
the preparation of the report of any meeting of the Conference of the Parties, which 
shall be published, distributed and circulated by the secretariat as an official document 
of the meeting. 
Rule 26
General powers of the President
1. In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon the President elsewhere in 
the present rules, the President shall declare the opening and closing of the meeting, 
preside at the meeting, ensure the observance of the present rules, accord the right to 
25/80
speak, put questions to the vote and announce decisions. The President shall rule on 
points of order and, subject to the present rules, shall have complete control of the 
proceedings and over the maintenance of order at the meeting. 
2. The President may propose to the Conference of the Parties the closure of the 
list of speakers, a limitation on the time to be allowed to speakers and on the number 
of times each representative may speak on a question, the adjournment or closure of 
the debate and the suspension or adjournment of a session. 
3. The President, in the exercise of the functions of that office, remains under the 
authority of the Conference of the Parties. 
Rule 27
Acting President
1. The President, if temporarily absent from a meeting or any part thereof, shall 
designate a Vice-President to act as President. The President so designated shall not 
at the same time exercise the rights of a representative of a Party. 
2. A Vice-President acting as President shall have the powers and duties of the 
President as set out in rule 26 of the present rules of procedure.
Rule 28
Replacement of an officer
If an officer of the Bureau resigns or is otherwise unable to complete the assigned 
term of office or to perform the functions of that office, a representative of the same 
Party shall be named by the Party concerned to replace the said officer for the 
remainder of that officer’s term. If the Party concerned declines to name a 
replacement, the Conference of the Parties shall elect a representative of the same 
United Nations regional group or of the small island developing States or the least
developed countries in the case of a Party concerned representing one of these groups,
to replace the said officer for the remainder of that officer’s term.
VII. Subsidiary bodies
Rule 29
Application of the rules to subsidiary bodies
The rules of procedure of the Conference of the Parties shall apply, mutatis mutandis, 
to all matters not specifically dealt with under the terms of reference and modalities 
for the operation of, and rules of procedure for, the subsidiary bodies establishe d 
under the Agreement.
Rule 30
Establishment of subsidiary bodies
1. The Conference of the Parties may establish, in accordance with article 47, 
paragraph 6 (d), of the Agreement, such subsidiary bodies as deemed necessary to 
support the implementation of the Agreement, in addition to the Access and BenefitSharing Committee, the Capacity-Building and Transfer of Marine Technology 
Committee, the Finance Committee on financial resources, the Implementation and 
Compliance Committee and the Scientific and Technical Body. 
2. Rule 29 of the present rules of procedure applies to any additional subsidiary 
body established in accordance with the present rule. 
26/80
VIII. Secretariat
Rule 31
Duties of the head of the secretariat
1. The head of the secretariat, or the designated representative of the head of the 
secretariat, shall exercise the functions of that office in all meetings of the Conference 
of the Parties and of its subsidiary bodies. 
2. The head of the secretariat shall arrange for the provision of staff and services 
required by the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies, within available 
resources. The head of the secretariat shall manage and direct such staff and services 
and provide appropriate support and advice to the Bureau of the Conference of the 
Parties and its subsidiary bodies.
Rule 32
Functions of the secretariat
In addition to the functions specified in the Agreement, in particular in article 50, the 
secretariat shall, in accordance with the present rules: 
(a) Arrange for interpretation at the meeting; 
(b) Collect, translate, reproduce, distribute and circulate the documents of the 
meeting; 
(c) Publish, distribute and circulate the official documents of the meeting; 
(d) Make and arrange for the keeping of sound recordings of the meeting; 
(e) Arrange for the custody and preservation of the documents of the meeting; 
(f) Perform all other work that the Conference of the Parties may require.
IX. Conduct of business
Rule 33
Sessions
Sessions of a meeting of the Conference of the Parties shall be held in public, 
unless the Conference of the Parties decides otherwise. Decisions to close a session 
to observers shall be taken by a majority of the Parties present and voting and shall 
be timebound.
Rule 34
Quorum
1. The President shall not declare a session of the meeting of the Conference of the 
Parties open or permit the debate to proceed unless at least one third of the Parties to 
the Agreement are present. The presence of a majority of the Parties to the Agreement 
shall be required for any decision to be taken. 
2. Quorum shall be determined on the basis of the number of votes that are entitled 
to be cast on a decision.
27/80
Rule 35
Procedures for speaking
1. No one may address a meeting without having previously obtained the 
permission of the President. Subject to rules 36 to 40 and 43 of the present rules of 
procedure, the President shall call upon speakers in the order in which they signify 
their desire to speak. The secretariat shall maintain a list of speakers. The President 
may call a speaker to order if the speaker’s remarks are not relevant to the subject 
under discussion. 
2. The Conference of the Parties may, on a proposal from the President or from 
any Party, limit the time allowed to each speaker and the number of times each 
representative may speak on a question. Before a decision is taken, two 
representatives may speak in favour of, and two against, a proposal to set such limits. 
When the debate is limited and a speaker exceeds the allotted time, the President shall 
call the speaker to order without delay. 
Rule 36
Precedence
1. Representatives of Parties shall be accorded precedence over observers, unless 
the Conference of the Parties decides otherwise. Precedence shall also be accorded to 
States not Party to the Agreement over other observers, while relevant global, 
regional, subregional and sectoral bodies precede over other entities and stakeholders 
in order, unless the Conference of the Parties decides otherwise.
2. The Chair or rapporteur of a subsidiary body may be accorded precedence for 
the purpose of explaining the conclusions arrived at by that subsidiary body. 
Rule 37
Statement by the secretariat
The head of the secretariat or a designated representative may at any time, including 
upon request or invitation by the Conference of the Parties, make either oral or written 
statements to the Conference of the Parties concerning any question under 
consideration by it.
Rule 38
Points of order
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may, at any time, raise a point 
of order, on which the President shall immediately rule in accordance with the present 
rules. A representative may appeal against the ruling of the President. The appeal shall 
be put to the vote immediately, and the President’s ruling shall stand unless overruled 
by a majority of the Parties present and voting. A representative may not, in raising a 
point of order, speak on the substance of the matter under discussion. 
Rule 39
Closing of list of speakers and right of reply
1. Delegations should exercise their right of reply at the end of the day whenever 
two sessions have been scheduled for that day and whenever such sessions are devoted 
to the consideration of the same item.
2. The number of interventions in the exercise of the right of reply for any 
delegation at a given session should be limited to two per item.
28/80
3. The first intervention in the exercise of the right of reply for any delegation on 
any item at a given session should be limited to ten minutes and the second 
intervention should be limited to five minutes.
4. During the course of a session, the President may announce the list of speakers 
and, with the consent of the Conference, declare the list closed. The President may, 
however, accord the right of reply to any representative if a speech delivered after he 
or she has declared the list closed makes this desirable.
Rule 40
Decisions on competence
In the event of a motion questioning its competence to discuss any matter or to adopt 
a proposal or an amendment to a proposal submitted to it, the Conference of the 
Parties shall take a decision on whether to affirm its competence before the matter is 
discussed or a decision is taken on the proposal or amendment in question. 
Rule 41
Application of article 18 of the Agreement
1. The establishment of area-based management tools, including marine protected 
areas, shall not include any areas within national jurisdiction and shall not be relied 
upon as a basis for asserting or denying any claims to sovereignty, sovereign rights 
or jurisdiction, including in respect of any disputes relating thereto. 
2. In the course of the procedure in article 21, a State may send a written 
notification to the secretariat indicating that it considers the proposal to raise concerns 
under article 18 of the Agreement. Upon receipt of the notification, the secretariat 
shall transmit it to all Parties and make it publicly available in accordance with article 
21, paragraph 3, of the Agreement. The proponent shall take due account of the views 
expressed in the notification. This is without prejudice to that State sending a further 
notification at a later stage in the procedure.
3. In accordance with article 18, the Conference of the Parties can look at proposals 
but shall not decide on proposals referred to under article 18, and in no case shall such 
proposals be interpreted as recognition or non-recognition of any claims to 
sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction.
Rule 42
Proposals and amendments to proposals
Proposals and amendments to proposals shall normally be introduced in writing, in 
one of the official languages, by the Parties, and handed to the secretariat, which shall 
circulate copies to delegations. As a general rule, no proposal or amendment to a 
proposal shall be discussed or put to the vote at any session unless copies of it have 
been circulated to delegations not later than the day preceding that session. The 
President may, however, permit the discussion and consideration of proposals, of 
amendments to proposals or of procedural motions, even when such proposals, 
amendments to proposals or motions have not been circulated or have been circulated 
only the same day. 
Rule 43
Order of procedural motions
1. Subject to rule 38 of the present rules of procedure, the following motions shall 
have precedence, in the order indicated below, over all other proposals or motions: 
29/80
(a) To suspend the session; 
(b) To adjourn the session; 
(c) To adjourn the debate on the question under discussion; 
(d) To close the debate on the question under discussion. 
2. Permission to speak on a motion falling within paragraph 1 (a)–(d) of the present 
rule shall be granted only to the proposer and to one speaker in favour of and two 
against the motion, after which it shall be put immediately to the vote. 
Rule 44
Withdrawal of proposals or motions
A proposal or motion may be withdrawn by its proposer at any time before voting on 
it has begun, provided that the proposal or motion has not been amended. A proposal 
or motion thus withdrawn may be reintroduced by any other Party. 
Rule 45
Reconsideration of proposals
When a proposal has been adopted or rejected, it may not be reconsidered at the same 
meeting, unless the Conference of the Parties, by a two-thirds majority of the Parties 
present and voting, so decides. Permission to speak on a motion to reconsider shall
be accorded only to the mover and to one speaker in favour of and two against the 
proposal, after which it shall be put immediately to the vote.
X. Decision-making
Rule 46
Right to vote
The rights of the Parties to vote are as provided for in article 64 of the Agreement. .
Rule 47
Voting thresholds
1. The Conference of the Parties shall make every effort to adopt decisions and 
recommendations by consensus. 
2. Except as otherwise provided in the Agreement, as set out in paragraph 3 of the 
present rule, [and rule 62,] if all efforts to reach consensus have been exhausted, 
decisions and recommendations of the Conference of the Parties on questions of 
substance shall be adopted by a two-thirds majority of the Parties present and voting, 
and decisions on questions of procedure shall be adopted by a majority of the Parties 
present and voting.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of the present rule: 
(a) Pursuant to article 14, paragraph 7, of the Agreement, if all efforts to reach 
consensus have been exhausted, decisions under that paragraph shall be adopted by 
the Conference of the Parties by a three-fourths majority of the Parties present and 
voting;
(b) Pursuant to article 23, paragraph 2, of the Agreement, if no consensus is reached 
on a decision or recommendation to be taken under Part III of the Agreement, that 
decision or recommendation shall be taken by a three-fourths majority of the Parties 
30/80
present and voting, before which the Conference of the Parties shall decide, by a two -
thirds majority of the Parties present and voting, that all efforts to reach consensus 
have been exhausted; 
(c) Pursuant to article 47, paragraph 6 (e), of the Agreement, if all efforts to reach 
consensus have been exhausted, the Conference of the Parties shall adopt a budget by 
a three-fourths majority of the Parties present and voting.
4. Except as otherwise set out in paragraph 3(b) of the present rule, a determination 
on whether all efforts to reach consensus have been exhausted shall be made by the 
President of the Conference of the Parties, after consulting with the Bureau.
5. When the issue arises as to whether a question is one of substance or not, that 
question shall be treated as one of substance unless otherwise decided by the 
Conference of Parties by the majority required for decisions on questions of 
substance.
6. If, on matters other than elections, a vote is equally divided, a second vote shall 
be taken. If this vote is also equally divided, the proposal shall be regarded as rejected. 
Rule 48
Deferment of voting upon a request for an advisory opinion
If the Conference of the Parties decides to request the International Tribunal for the 
Law of the Sea to give an advisory opinion in accordance with article 47, paragraph 
7, of the Agreement, the Conference of the Parties shall defer decision-making on that 
proposal pending receipt of the advisory opinion by the Tribunal. If the advisory 
opinion is not received before the closure of the meeting during which it is requested, 
the Conference of the Parties shall decide when it will meet to decide upon the 
deferred proposal.
Rule 49
Order of voting on proposals
If two or more proposals relate to the same question, the Conference of the Parties 
shall make every effort to merge these proposals and adopt them by consensus. If all 
efforts to reach consensus have been exhausted, the Conference of the Parties, unless 
it decides otherwise, shall decide on the proposals in the order in which they have 
been submitted. The Conference of the Parties may, after each decision on a proposal, 
decide whether to decide on the next proposal. 
Rule 50
Division of proposals and amendments
1. Any representative may request that any part of a proposal or of an amendment 
to a proposal be decided on separately. The President shall allow the request unless a 
Party objects. If an objection is made to the request for division, the President shall 
permit two representatives to speak, one in favour of and the other against the request, 
after which it shall be put immediately to a vote. The President may limit the time 
allowed to each speaker. 
2. If the request referred to in paragraph 1 of the present rule is allowed or adopted, 
those parts of a proposal or of an amendment to a proposal that are approved shall 
then be decided on as a whole. If all the operative parts of a proposal or amendment 
have been rejected, the proposal or amendment shall be considered to have been 
rejected as a whole. 
31/80
Rule 51
Amendment to a proposal
A motion is considered to be an amendment to a proposal if it merely adds to, deletes 
from or revises parts of that proposal. An amendment shall be decided on before the 
proposal to which it relates is decided on and, if the amendment is adopted, the 
amended proposal shall then be decided on.
Rule 52
Order of voting on amendments to a proposal
If two or more amendments to a proposal are proposed, the Conference of the Parties 
shall first decide on the amendment furthest removed in substance from the original 
proposal, then on the amendment next furthest removed therefrom, and so on, until 
all the amendments have been decided on. The President shall determine the order of 
decision-making on the amendments under the present rule.
Rule 53
Method of voting for general matters
1. Voting, except for elections, may be by show of hands. A roll-call vote shall be 
taken if so requested by any Party. The roll call shall be taken in the English 
alphabetical order of the names of the Parties, beginning with the Party whose name 
is drawn by lot by the President. 
2. When the Conference of the Parties votes by mechanical means, a non-recorded 
vote shall replace a vote by show of hands, and a recorded vote shall replace a roll 
call.
3. The vote of each Party participating in a roll call or a recorded vote shall be 
included in the relevant documents of the meeting. 
Rule 54
Conduct during voting
After the President has announced the beginning of voting, no representative shall 
interrupt the voting except on a point of order in connection with the actual conduct 
of the voting. The President may permit the Parties to explain their votes, either befo re 
or after the voting. The President may limit the time to be allowed for such 
explanations. The President shall not permit the proposer of a proposal or of an 
amendment to a proposal to explain his or her vote on his or her own proposal or 
amendment, except if it has been amended.
XI. Elections
Rule 55
Method of voting for elections
1. All elections shall be held by secret ballot, unless otherwise decided by the 
Conference of the Parties. 
2. Voting shall be dispensed with when the number of candidates corresponds to 
or is lower than the number of seats to be filled, unless a Party specifically requests a 
vote on a given election.
32/80
Rule 56
Absence of majority
1. When one person or one delegation is to be elected and no candidate obtains, in 
the first ballot, a majority of the votes cast by the Parties present and voting, a second 
ballot, restricted to the two candidates obtaining the largest number of votes, shall be 
taken. If, in the second ballot, the votes are equally divided, the President shall decide 
between the candidates by drawing lots. 
2. In the case of a tie in the first ballot among three or more candidates obtaining 
the largest number of votes, a second ballot shall be held. If a tie results among more 
than two candidates, the number shall be reduced to two by drawing lots, and the 
balloting, restricted to them, shall continue in accordance with the procedure set forth 
in paragraph 1 of the present rule. 
Rule 57
Election to two or more elective places
1. When two or more elective places are to be filled at one time under the same 
conditions, those candidates, in a number not exceeding the number of such places, 
obtaining in the first ballot the largest number of votes and a majority of the votes 
cast by the Parties present and voting shall be deemed elected. 
2. If the number of candidates obtaining such majority is less than the number of 
persons or delegations to be elected, there shall be additional ballots to fill the 
remaining places, the voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining the greatest 
number of votes in the previous ballot, to a number not more than twice the number 
of places remaining to be filled, provided that, after the third inconclusive ballot, 
votes may be cast for any eligible person or delegation. 
3. If three such unrestricted ballots are inconclusive, the next three ballots shall be 
restricted to the candidates who obtained the greatest number of votes in the third of 
the unrestricted ballots, to a number not more than twice the number of places 
remaining to be filled, and the following three ballots thereafter shall be unrestricted, 
and so on, until all the places have been filled. 
XII. Languages and sound recordings
Rule 58
Official languages
The official languages of the Conference of the Parties shall be Arabic, Chinese, 
English, French, Russian and Spanish. 
Rule 59
Interpretation
1. Statements made in an official language shall be interpreted into the other 
official languages. 
2. Any representative may speak in a language other than an official language if 
that representative provides for interpretation into one official language. 
Interpretation into the other languages of the Conference of the Parties by the 
interpreters of the secretariat may be based on the interpretation given in the first such 
language.
33/80
Rule 60
Languages of official documents
Official documents of the meetings shall be drawn up in one of the official languages 
and translated into the other official languages. 
Rule 61
Sound recordings of meetings
Sound recordings of the meetings of the Conference of the Parties and, whenever 
possible, of its subsidiary bodies, shall be kept by the secretariat, consistent with the 
practice of the United Nations.
XIII. Amendments to the rules of procedure
Rule 62
Amending the rules of procedure
The present rules of procedure may be amended by a decision of the Conference of 
the Parties taken by consensus. In cases where the President decides, after consulting 
with the Bureau, that all efforts to reach consensus have been exhausted, the 
amendment shall be adopted by a decision of the Conference of the Parties adopted 
by a three-fourths majority of the Parties present and voting.
XIV. Overriding authority of the Agreement
Rule 63
Precedence of the Agreement
1. Nothing in the present rules shall be construed as contradicting or modifying 
any provision of the Agreement.
2. In the event of any conflict between any provision of the present rules and any 
provision of the Agreement, the Agreement shall prevail.
XV. Miscellaneous
Rule 64
Italicized headings
The italicized headings of the present rules are for reference purposes only. They shall 
be disregarded in the interpretation of the rules.
Annex II
Draft terms of reference and modalities for the operation 
of, and rules of procedure for, the subsidiary bodies 
established under the Agreement under the United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the 
Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological 
Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction
I. Relationship with the rules of procedure of the Conference 
of the Parties
(ALL)1. The rules of procedure of the Conference of the Parties shall apply, mutatis 
mutandis, to all matters not specifically dealt with under these terms of reference and 
modalities for the operation of, and rules of procedure for, the subsidiary bodies 
established under the Agreement, in accordance with rule 29 of the rules of procedure 
of the Conference of the Parties. 
II. Purpose and functions
(ALL)2. Under the authority and guidance of the Conference of the Parties, the 
subsidiary bodies shall fulfil the functions assigned to them under the Agreement and 
any such other functions as may be determined by the Conference of the Parties, in 
order to support the implementation of the Agreement with a view to the attainment 
of its objectives.
(ALL)3. In implementing their functions, the subsidiary bodies shall be guided by 
articles 5, 6, 7, and 8 of the Agreement, as well as any other relevant provisions of 
the Agreement. 
III. Membership
(ALL)4. For the purposes of these terms of reference and modalities for the operation 
of, and rules of procedure for, the subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement, 
“member” means a member of any subsidiary body established under the Agreement 
nominated by Parties and elected by the Conference of the Parties.
(ALL)5. The members of the subsidiary bodies shall serve in their personal capacity, 
as experts and acting objectively in the best interest of the Agreement.
(ALL)6. In the exercise of their functions, members of the subsidiary bodies shall 
uphold the highest standards of integrity and impartiality and shall maintain the 
confidentiality of any information designated as confidential, including scientific, 
technical or proprietary data, as well as relevant traditional knowledge of Indigenous 
Peoples and of local communities, both during and after their term of service.
(STB)7. The members of the Scientific and Technical Body shall act impartially and 
base their findings and recommendations on an objective, scientific and technical
35/80
assessment, using the best available science and scientific information, and relevant 
traditional knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and local communities, where available. 
1. Eligibility criteria
(ALL)8. The members of the subsidiary bodies shall possess the necessary 
qualifications, experience or expertise, as required in the relevant articles of the 
Agreement. Indicative, non-exhaustive lists including examples of such experience 
or expertise for each subsidiary body are provided in the Annex to these terms of 
reference and modalities for the operation of, and rules of procedure for, the 
subsidiary bodies under the Agreement.
2. Number of members 
[Access and Benefit-Sharing Committee
(ABS)9. In accordance with article 15, paragraph 2 of the Agreement, the Access and 
Benefit-Sharing Committee shall be composed of 15 members.
(ABS)9.1. The members of the Access and Benefit-Sharing Committee shall consist 
of: 
(a) 2 members from each of the United Nations regional groups, namely, African 
States, Asia-Pacific States, Eastern European States, Latin American and Caribbean 
States and Western European and other States;
(b) 2 members from small island developing States;
(c) 1 member from least developed countries;
(d) 1 member from landlocked developing countries; and
(e) 1 member from other categories of developing States parties referred to in the 
Agreement,38 not included in (b)-(d), to be filled on a rotational basis following an 
agreed sequence, in a manner that ensures geographic distribution, balanced 
participation over time, and avoids the concentration of representation among a 
limited number of States.
Capacity-Building and Transfer of Marine Technology Committee
(CBTMTC)9. The Capacity-Building and Transfer of Marine Technology Committee 
shall be composed of 22 members. 
(CBTMTC)9.1. The members of the Capacity-Building and Transfer of Marine 
Technology Committee shall consist of: 
(a) 3 members from each of the United Nations regional groups, namely, African 
States, Asia-Pacific States, Eastern European States, Latin American and Caribbean 
States and Western European and other States; 
(b) 2 members from small island developing States;
(c) 2 members from least developed countries;
(d) 2 members from landlocked developing countries; and
__________________
38 Developing States Parties from geographically disadvantaged States, coastal African States, 
archipelagic States and developing middle-income countries.
36/80
(e) 1 member from other categories of developing States parties referred to in the 
Agreement,39 not included in (b)-(d), to be filled on a rotational basis following an 
agreed sequence, in a manner that ensures geographic distribution, balanced 
participation over time, and avoids the concentration of representation among a 
limited number of States.
Implementation and Compliance Committee
(ICC)9. The Implementation and Compliance Committee shall be composed of 14
members.
(ICC)9.1. The members of the Implementation and Compliance Committee shall 
consist of: 
(a) 2 members from each of the United Nations regional groups, namely, African 
States, Asia-Pacific States, Eastern European States, Latin American and Caribbean 
States and Western European and other States;
(b) 1 member from small island developing States;
(c) 1 member from least developed countries;
(d) 1 member from landlocked developing countries; and
(e) 1 member from other categories of developing States parties referred to in the 
Agreement,40 not included in (b)-(d), to be filled on a rotational basis following an 
agreed sequence, in a manner that ensures geographic distribution, balanced 
participation over time, and avoids the concentration of representation among a 
limited number of States.
Finance Committee on financial resources
(FC)9. The Finance Committee on financial resources shall be composed of [x]
members. 
(FC)9.1. The members of the Finance Committee on financial resources shall consist 
of: 
(a) [x] members from each of the United Nations regional groups, namely, African 
States, Asia-Pacific States, Eastern European States, Latin American and Caribbean 
States and Western European and other States;
[(b) [x] member[s] from each of the categories of least developed countries, small 
island developing States, landlocked developing countries and archipelagic States;
and]
[(c) 1 member from each of the five largest financial contributors to the budget of the 
Agreement.] 
Scientific and Technical Body
(STB)9. The Scientific and Technical Body shall be composed of 35 members.
(STB)9.1. The members of the Scientific and Technical Body shall consist of:
__________________
39 Developing States Parties from geographically disadvantaged States, coastal African States, 
archipelagic States and developing middle-income countries.
40 Developing States Parties from geographically disadvantaged States, coastal African States, 
archipelagic States and developing middle-income countries.
37/80
(a) 5 members from each of the United Nations regional groups, namely, African 
States, Asia-Pacific States, Eastern European States, Latin American and Caribbean 
States and Western European and other States;
(b) 3 members from small island developing States;
(c) 3 members from least developed countries;
(d) 2 members from landlocked developing countries; and
(e) 2 members from other categories of developing States parties referred to in the 
Agreement,41 not included in (b)-(d), to be filled on a rotational basis following an 
agreed sequence, in a manner that ensures geographic distribution, balanced 
participation over time, and avoids the concentration of representation among a 
limited number of States.]
3. Selection process 
(ALL)10. The members of the subsidiary bodies shall be nominated by Parties and 
elected by the Conference of the Parties in accordance with rule s 55 to 57 of the rules 
of procedure of the Conference of the Parties, and taking into account gender balance 
and equitable geographical distribution or representation, as well as the following:
(a) The secretariat shall address a letter to States Parties and the Chairs of the 
United Nations regional groups, inviting the submission of nominations, including 
the names and curricula vitae of the proposed candidates, no later than 90 days before 
the next meeting of the Conference of the Parties; 
(b) Nominations for members identified in paragraphs 9.1 (a) to (e) above shall be 
made by States Parties, either individually or through their relevant regional groups 
or categories of States, where applicable, and submitted, through the secretariat, to 
the Conference of the Parties. States Parties and regional groups, or categories of 
States, where applicable, are encouraged to nominate members identified in 
paragraphs 9.1 (a) to (e) above, taking into account gender balance and, as 
appropriate, early-career ocean professionals;
(c) Proposed candidates should be persons. A Party should not be accepted as a 
proposed candidate even if it plans to identify a person at a later time;
(d) The Conference of the Parties will reach its decisions at its next meeting, taking 
into account gender balance and the expertise and experience required for the work 
of the subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement. 
4. Term of office 
(ALL)11. Subject to paragraph (ALL)12, members shall serve from the close of the 
ordinary meeting at which they are elected for a term of four years from the date of 
appointment and shall be limited to two terms.
(ALL)12. The terms of one half of members elected at the first election shall expire 
at the end of two years, and the terms of the remaining members shall expire at the 
end of four years.
5. Replacement members
__________________
41 Developing States Parties from geographically disadvantaged States, coastal African States, 
archipelagic States and developing middle-income countries.
38/80
(ALL)13. If a member of a subsidiary body resigns or is otherwise unable to complete 
their assigned term, a replacement shall be nominated by the United Nations regional 
group or by the relevant category of States concerned to serve on an interim basis 
until elected by the Conference of the Parties at its next ordinary meeting, for the 
remainder of that member’s term.
6. Officers
(ALL)14. Each subsidiary body shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its
members, taking into account gender balance and equitable geographical 
representation, with due consideration given to geographical rotation, for a term of 
two years. 
(ALL)15. Officers shall serve for a maximum of two terms, which may be held 
consecutively. 
(ALL)16. In the absence of the Chair, or in the event of a conflict of interest for the 
Chair, the Vice-Chair shall take his or her place. If the Chair of a subsidiary body, for 
any reason, is unable to complete the term of office, the relevant subsidiary body shall 
elect a new Chair for the remainder of the term. 
IV. Modalities for the operation of the subsidiary bodies 
established under the Agreement 
(ALL)17. Each subsidiary body may develop specific additional modalities for the 
discharge of its functions and shall submit them to the Conference of the Parties for 
approval.
1. Programme of work 
(ALL)18. The subsidiary bodies shall work in a timely and efficient manner. 
(ALL)19. The Conference of the Parties shall approve, in accordance with the 
Agreement, the matters to be considered by each subsidiary body, and the President 
may, upon the request of the Chair of the subsidiary body concerned, adjust the 
allocation of work.
(ALL)20. Under the guidance of the Conference of the Parties, the subsidiary bodies 
shall develop their own programmes of work, including activities of any ad hoc 
groups, working groups or subcommittees, and relevant time frames. The programme 
of work shall be flexible. The subsidiary bodies shall submit their programmes of 
work to each ordinary meeting of the Conference of the Parties for consideration. 
(ALL)21. The programme of work for each of the subsidiary bodies shall include, 
inter alia:
(a) a standing item on cooperation with relevant instruments, frameworks and 
bodies;
(b) a standing item on the needs, priorities and other matters related to small island 
developing States, in relation to its respective function;
(c) a standing item on Indigenous Peoples and local communities, and their 
traditional knowledge, in relation to the function of the subsidiary body.
(ALL)22. In preparing its programme of work, each subsidiary body shall take into 
account the needs and priorities of developing States, in particular least developed 
39/80
countries, landlocked developing countries, geographically disadvantaged States, 
small island developing States, coastal African States, archipelagic States and 
developing middle-income countries.
(ALL)23. The subsidiary bodies shall collaborate with each other and the secretariat 
for the purpose of developing and implementing a joint programme of work to address 
the needs, priorities and special circumstances of small island developing States 
across all subsidiary bodies. The development and implementation of the joint 
programme of work shall be led by the Capacity-Building and Transfer of Marine 
Technology Committee.
2. Meetings 
(i) Dates of meetings
(ALL)24.The Chair of a subsidiary body, in consultation with the secretariat and the 
President of the Conference of the Parties, shall decide on the dates of the meetings 
of the respective subsidiary body.
(ii) Languages
(ALL)25. Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the working 
languages of the subsidiary bodies. 
(ALL)26. Interpretation shall be offered between all working languages during 
meetings of the subsidiary bodies.
(ALL)27. Reports and other documents will be made available in all working 
languages. 
(ALL)28. Meetings of any ad hoc groups, working groups or subcommittees of the 
subsidiary bodies shall be held in English only and without interpretation.
(iii) In-person, virtual and hybrid participation
(ALL)29. The subsidiary bodies may meet in person, virtually or in a hybrid format, 
including intersessionally, taking into account different time zones and the challenges 
and resource restraints faced by developing States Parties, in particular the least 
developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing 
States
(iv) Observers
(ALL)30. The meetings of the subsidiary bodies and their ad hoc groups, working 
groups or subcommittees shall be open to accredited observers unless the Conference 
of the Parties or the subsidiary body concerned decides, by a two-thirds majority, that 
the meeting should be closed, as necessary. Decisions to close meetings to observers 
shall be timebound. Accredited observers participating in the meetings of subsidiary 
bodies shall not have the right to vote.
(ALL)31. States Parties to the Agreement may attend the meetings of the subsidiary 
bodies and their ad hoc groups, working groups and subcommittees as observers, 
without the right to vote.
(ICC)32. When deliberations of the Implementation and Compliance Committee 
pertain to preparing recommendations or voting on recommendations, the Committee 
may decide to close those deliberations to observers, other than State s Parties. 
40/80
(ALL)33. The Chairs of subsidiary bodies under the Agreement may attend the 
meetings of the other subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement and may 
participate in such meetings without the right to vote.
3. Decision-making 
(ALL)34. A majority of the members of the subsidiary body shall constitute a quorum, 
but in the event of the subsidiary body being open-ended, one quarter of the Parties 
shall constitute a quorum.
(ALL)35. Members of subsidiary bodies shall make every effort to adopt 
recommendations to the Conference of the Parties by consensus. If the Chair of the 
subsidiary body determines that all efforts to reach consensus have been exhausted, 
recommendations to be submitted to the Conference of the Parties shall be adopted 
by a vote and each member of the subsidiary body shall have one vote. 
(ALL)36. When matters are subject to a vote, decisions of subsidiary bodies shall be 
taken by a two-thirds majority of its members present and voting.
(ALL)37. The Chair of a subsidiary body may exercise the right to vote.
(ALL)38. When decisions of subsidiary bodies will significantly affect any State, 
group of States, Indigenous Peoples and local communities, or traditional knowledge, 
the subsidiary bodies shall make all reasonable efforts to consult with those affected
before finalizing recommendations to the Conference of the Parties.
(ALL)39. All decisions taken by the subsidiary bodies shall be duly included in their 
reports. In particular, when any matter is subject to a vote, the subsidiary body shall
ensure that the views of all members of the body are fairly reflected in its report to 
the Conference of the Parties.
4. Recommendations 
(ALL)40. In providing recommendations within their competences, the subsidiary 
bodies may provide options, when applicable, and shall include reasons and relevant 
supporting documents.
(ALL)41. Recommendations to the Conference of the Parties shall include 
information on how such recommendations would affect the capacity of developing 
States to implement them.
(ICC)42. The Implementation and Compliance Committee shall make 
recommendations, as appropriate, while cognizant of relevant national circumstances, 
to the Conference of the Parties, accompanied by implementation and reporting 
timelines and recommended capacity-building measures.
5. Reporting requirements 
(ALL)43. The subsidiary bodies shall prepare, and thereafter transmit, a report on 
their work to each ordinary meeting of the Conference of the Parties through the 
secretariat, in accordance with any guidelines approved by the Conference of the 
Parties. The subsidiary bodies shall submit their reports to the secretariat before the 
opening of the meeting of the Conference of the Parties at which it is to be considered. 
A copy of the report shall also be transmitted to members of the relevant subsidiary 
body.
(ALL)44. The report shall cover the work that the subsidiary body has carried out 
since its previous report to perform its functions, as set out in the Agreement and these 
41/80
terms of reference and modalities for the operation of, and rules of procedure for, the 
subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement, all matters considered at the 
meetings of the subsidiary body, and by its ad hoc groups, working groups or 
subcommittees, as appropriate.
(ALL)45. Unless a subsidiary body decides otherwise, reports of the subsidiary bodies 
shall be made public once adopted, subject to the need to protect confidential 
information.
(ALL)46. The subsidiary bodies may recommend standardized reporting templates to 
the Conference of the Parties.
(ALL)47. Subsidiary bodies may, where appropriate, prepare joint reports or 
coordinated sections of their reports on cross-cutting matters.
6. Establishment of ad hoc groups, working groups or subcommittees
(ALL)48. Ad hoc groups, working groups or subcommittees may be established by 
the subsidiary bodies under the guidance of the Conference of the Parties, as required, 
to provide advice and recommendations to the subsidiary bodies.
7. Experts
(ALL)49. The subsidiary bodies may invite experts on an ad hoc basis, taking into 
account gender balance and geographical representation, to participate in their work 
or that of their ad hoc groups, working groups and subcommittees, as needed. The 
participation of such experts shall be limited in duration and to specific needs. An 
expert participating in the work of the subsidiary bodies shall not have the right to 
vote.
(STB)50. Pursuant to article 31, paragraph 3, of the Agreement, a roster of experts 
shall be created under the Scientific and Technical Body to provide advice and 
assistance for Parties with capacity constraints who request it, to conduct and evaluate 
screenings and environmental impact assessments for a planned activity under their 
jurisdiction or control. The roster shall be created by the Scientific and Technical 
Body and administered by the secretariat. The Scientific and Technical Body shall 
develop guidance for, inter alia, the selection of roster members and procedures for 
the regular review and update of the roster, which shall be approved by the Conference 
of the Parties. States Parties may nominate experts for the roster.
(ALL)51. Subsidiary bodies may establish additional rosters of experts, including a 
general roster of expertise relevant to that subsidiary body, and a roster of experts on 
issues pertaining to Indigenous Peoples and local communities, and traditional 
knowledge. 
8. Financial arrangements 
(ALL)52. Pursuant to the terms of reference of the voluntary trust fund established 
under the Agreement, the participation of members of subsidiary bodies from 
developing States Parties, in particular least developed countries, landlocked 
developing countries and small island developing States, in the meetings of the 
subsidiary bodies may be facilitated through the operation of that fund.
V. Cooperation and coordination 
42/80
(ALL)53. The subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement shall seek to 
cooperate with other relevant legal instruments and frameworks and relevant global, 
regional, subregional and sectoral bodies, as well as engage with other stakeholders. 
To facilitate such cooperation, the subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement 
may engage, through their Chairs, Vice-Chairs or other member authorized by the 
Chairs or Vice-Chairs, with bodies of other relevant legal instruments and frameworks 
and relevant global, regional, subregional and sectoral bodies.
(ALL)54. In performing their tasks in furtherance of the objectives of the Agreement, 
the subsidiary bodies shall take into account the work done by relevant legal 
instruments and frameworks and relevant global, regional, subregional and sectoral 
bodies and shall seek to avoid duplication.
(ALL)55. Subject to funding availability, the Chair, Vice-Chair or other member of 
the relevant subsidiary body authorized by the Chair or Vice-Chair, may, after 
consulting with that body, represent that subsidiary body established under the 
Agreement at relevant meetings of equivalent bodies of such instruments, frameworks 
and bodies, on the basis of mutual consent and joint arrangements with the relevant 
bodies concerned.
(ALL)56. The subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement may cooperate and 
coordinate with the secretariat, one another and the Clearing-House Mechanism, 
including through consultations, participation in meetings and joint meetings, as well 
as any other modalities as may be necessary, subject to any guidance from the 
Conference of the Parties. 
VI. Conflict of interest and confidentiality 
(ALL)57. For the purposes of these terms of reference and modalities for the operation 
of, and rules of procedure for, the subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement, 
“conflict of interest” means any interest, including a business or financial interest, 
that could affect the ability of a member or expert to discharge their duties and 
responsibilities objectively and includes a real, potential or apparent conflict of 
interest. 
(ALL)58. Each member of the subsidiary bodies shall, with respect to any matter that 
is under consideration by or under the mandate of, the relevant subsidiary body, avoid 
any conflict of interest. 
(ALL)59. Members of the Implementation and Compliance Committee shall not 
participate in the deliberations to prepare recommendations or vote on 
recommendations that relate to the Party that nominated them.
(ALL)60. The subsidiary bodies shall require each member, as well as each invited 
expert, to disclose any conflict of interest prior to participating in the work of the 
subsidiary body. Members and experts shall also be required to inform the relevant 
subsidiary body of any change in the information disclosed, including any new 
conflicts of interest, as soon as practicable.
(ALL)61. The Conference of the Parties shall decide on individual cases of conflict 
of interest concerning members of the subsidiary bodies.
(ALL)62. The subsidiary bodies shall decide on individual cases of conflict of interest 
concerning experts invited to take part in their work.
43/80
(ALL)63. Members and invited experts of the subsidiary bodies shall maintain the 
confidentiality, even after the termination of their functions, of any data that are 
transferred to the subsidiary body in accordance with the Agreement, or any other 
confidential or proprietary information coming to their knowledge by reason of their 
membership of, or participation in, that subsidiary body. Observers shall maintain the 
confidentiality of any data or other confidential or proprietary information coming to 
their knowledge by reason of their participation in any subsidiary body.
(ALL)64. The transmission of information held by a subsidiary body to another 
subsidiary body established under the Agreement, and to the Clearing-House 
Mechanism, shall be consistent with the confidentiality obligations set out in the 
Agreement and in these terms of reference and modalities for the operation of, and 
rules of procedure for, the subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement.
(ALL)65. In the event of an alleged breach of an obligation relating to conflict of 
interest or confidentiality by a member of any subsidiary body, invited expert or 
observer, the Conference of the Parties may take appropriate action and shall make 
any findings and recommendations publicly available.
VII. Relationship with the Agreement
(ALL)66. Nothing in these terms of reference and modalities for the operation of, and 
rules of procedure for, the subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement shall be 
construed as contradicting or modifying any provision of the Agreement.
(ALL)67. In the event of any conflict between any paragraph of the present terms of 
reference and modalities for the operation of, and rules of procedure for, the 
subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement and any provision of the 
Agreement, the Agreement shall prevail.
VIII. Review and amendments
(ALL)68. These terms of reference and modalities for the operation of, and rules of 
procedure for, the subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement may be subject 
to periodic review by the subsidiary bodies and the Conference of the Parties.
(ALL)69. These terms of reference and modalities for the operation of, and rules of 
procedure for, the subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement may be 
amended by a decision of the Conference of the Parties.
(ALL)70. A subsidiary body may make recommendations for amendments to these 
terms of reference and modalities for the operation of, and rules of procedure for, the 
subsidiary bodies established under the Agreement, with reference to their application 
to that subsidiary body, which shall be subject to approval by the Conference of the 
Parties.
44/80
Annex
Lists of appropriate qualifications and expertise for 
members of subsidiary bodies
1. The lists of areas of expertise set out below for each subsidiary body are indicative 
and non-exhaustive, and shall not preclude the nomination and election of members 
possessing other relevant qualifications, expertise, or professional experience, 
necessary for the effective performance of the functions of the relevant subsidiary 
body.
2. The Conference of the Parties shall periodically review the list of areas of expertise 
for each body, with a view to including any additional competencies necessary for the 
effective performance of the functions of the relevant subsidiary body.
Access and Benefit-Sharing Committee
3. The members of the Access and Benefit-Sharing Committee may possess 
recognized experience and expertise in relation to one or more aspects of marine 
genetic resources, including the fair and equitable sharing of benefits, in particular 
those relevant to the work of the Committee, which may include: legal, policy, 
scientific or technical expertise, or technical expertise and/or professional experience 
in relation to marine genetic resources and digital sequence information on marine 
genetic resources, such as utilization, including commercialization, best practices, 
tools and methodologies, data science and governance, traditional knowledge of 
Indigenous Peoples and local communities, and multilateral benefit-sharing, 
including the sharing of both monetary and non-monetary benefits; as well as 
expertise in managing databases and repositories, biotechnology, including 
commercial aspects, marine genetic science, synthetic biology, bioprospecting and 
other related fields of expertise.
Capacity-Building and Transfer of Marine Technology Committee
4. The members of the Capacity-Building and Transfer of Marine Technology 
Committee may possess recognized experience and expertise in capacity-building and 
the transfer of marine technology in one or more aspects of the conservation and 
sustainable use of marine biological diversity, in particular those relevant to the work 
of the Committee, which may include legal, policy, scientific or technical expertise 
and/or professional experience concerning capaci